Using current mining costs as a measure of required mining profitability over
100 years from now is dubious, since we don’t know how mining technology will
progress over time. It is entirely possible that mining chips will become so
small and cheap that they can be installed on all electronic devices — similar
to the goal 21 Inc. hopes to achieve. This development would turn mining from a
purposeful business decision to an after thought, surviving in the background
of daily life. Furthermore, mining hardware may become so energy efficient over
the next century that transaction fees prove to be plenty to keep miners in
business.

What happens if you send Bitcoin to a Litecoin address?
Short Answer

    Obviously, it's a bad idea to experiment as funny things can happen. That being said, your client should simply recognize it as an invalid address and reject the transaction.
    While the Litecoin address is valid for Litecoins, it is not valid for Bitcoins, hence should be quickly rejected.
    Litecoin addresses start with "L", so your client would immediately recognize it as invalid.

Long Answer

    A Bitcoin or Litecoin address consists of:
        a prefix byte
        a 160-bit hash of a public key
        a 32-bit checksum
    all base-58 encoded.

    Bitcoin and Litecoin use different prefix bytes; this is why most Bitcoin
    addresses start with 1, while most Litecoin addresses start with L.

    When you use a Bitcoin client to try to send money to an address, it should
    perform a number of checks on that address. One of those checks would be
    the prefix byte. When it notices that the address doesn't have the correct
    prefix byte for Bitcoin, it should barf, complaining that you have
    specified an invalid address. It wouldn't try to create a transaction at
    all.

    So for practical purposes, the answer to the question is "you can't do it".

    The same applies if you try to send Litecoins to a Bitcoin address - the
    prefix byte would not match the Litecoin client's expectation, so it would
    reject the address and refuse to create a transaction.

    In theory, if you somehow used a broken client that did not check the
    prefix byte, it might actually generate a transaction whose output
    specified the 160-bit hash of the public key corresponding to the Litecoin
    address (call this hash value H). The hash is the only part of the address
    that is actually used in creating a transaction. Since all possible 160-bit
    numbers are potentially valid hashes, there would be no way to tell that H
    had come from a Litecoin rather than a Bitcoin key, so this would be a
    valid Bitcoin transaction. (I got this wrong in a previous version of the
    answer.) The transaction could only be spent by a Bitcoin transaction,
    signed with a private key whose public key had the hash H.

    Now I believe (though I am not completely sure) that Litecoin uses exactly
    the same ECDSA signature algorithms as Bitcoin. Therefore, if you (or
    someone else) has the private key for the Litecoin address, both Bitcoin
    and Litecoin should agree as to what the corresponding public key is, and
    agree that it has hash H. So in principle, the private key holder would be
    able to import this key into a Bitcoin wallet and use it to spend the coins
    sent to the Litecoin address by the broken client. (They couldn't import
    the key directly, again because the prefix byte would be wrong; but they
    could decode the base58-encoded Litecoin private key string, extract the
    256-bit number which is the actual private key, prefix it with the
    appropriate Bitcoin prefix byte, recalculate the checksum, and re-encode
    the whole thing in base 58. The result would be suitable to import into a
    standard Bitcoin wallet.)

    If I am wrong about this, and Bitcoin and Litecoin handle keys and
    signatures differently, then most likely there would be no feasible way to
    find a private key whose public key's hash (computed by Bitcoin's rules)
    was equal to H. In that case, the coins sent to that address would be lost
    forever.

Why doesn't Bitcoin return lost coins back into the block reward?

    To do so would force those with coins to spend them -- even if just sending to themselves.
    Spending coins lessens privacy. That is a property of bitcoin that should not be diminished through this forceful measure.
    Incidentally, why this fear of lost coins?
    So there are lost coins. It happens. And we have fewer as a result. It is not a problem -- except for those who lost them :-)

    The sense in which it is a real problem is that it makes the supply of
    Bitcoins increasinbly unknowable. If 100,000 Bitcoins haven't moved in 50
    years, are they lost? Or could they be spent tomorrow? The number of coins
    in this unknown state will increase over time.

    I think you just did explain when you wrote that Bitcoin is not anonymous.
    Taking proper precautions, however, it can be used anonymously. So forcing
    me to spend my coins, even if to myself, would reveal information that I
    might not wish to reveal. It's my money, I should not be forced to do
    anything with it just because others are frustrated in not knowing the true
    level of the money supply. That's the property that those holding physical
    gold like about holding physical gold -- it is theirs to do with as they
    please. Bitcoiners will not accept an approach that impacts that benefit.

(In reference to the previous question)
What about a 'keep alive' algorithm in the Bitcoin client which is setup to
'send coins to self' every 2 - 5 years (where the amount of time picked is a
balance between time and the generation of unnecessary transactions). Anybody
running the client and maintaining a wallet with coins would automatically have
their coins kept 'fresh' with the appropriate refresh interval. The client
would then be setup to 'cull the blockchain' by ignoring transactions that are
'stale'. Destroyed coins could then be added back as an extension of the mining
rewards.

    This doesn't deal with the fact that people may be storing coins in a wallet that is not open in a client.


I understand this might be a simple question but what do cryptocurrency companies do with these problems when you mine. I know you get reward for solving a problem but what will bitcoin do with that?

    Contrary to popular belief, mining is not actually solving any problems.
    There are no math problems that miners are working on to solve. Rather what
    miners are doing are just hashing data and then seeing if the resulting
    hash is less than a given target which everyone can calculate independently
    with data from the blockchain. The work that they are doing is only for
    securing the Bitcoin blockchain; it is not useful for anything else. So
    they aren't solving puzzles or problems, they are just doing work to make
    the Bitcoin blockchain secure.

Can Bitcoin be stored in a computer without a wallet , just like a normal file?

    On the technical level, there is no such a thing as a Bitcoin. What there
    actually are are transaction outputs. Transaction outputs consist of a
    output script and a value. The value is in satoshis, and that is what gives
    your wallet a "balance". The output script specifies a set of conditions
    that are required to spend the value associated with that output.
    Typically the output script requires that a digital signature be made with
    a public key whose hash matches a hash provided in the output script.

    So, no, a "Bitcoin itself" does not have any associated files that you can
    store. However you can store the Bitcoin blockchain (thus store the
    transaction data, including transaction outputs) locally, and that is what
    nodes do. But storing it offline would mean that it becomes out of date
    very quickly and thus missing new transactions.

    Alternatively you can store the private keys which are necessary to spend
    from the typical type of transaction output. These can be stored
    independently of any wallet software. But you still need some software to
    create a transaction and then broadcast it to the rest of the network. In
    order for a transaction to "go through", you must broadcast the transaction
    so that it can be added to the blockchain. Just making it offline won't do
    anything.

Is there a chance to return all of the lost money invested when the chart goes back up?

    Your math doesn't make sense - if the price of TRX is $0.001 then the value
    of 30 TRX is $0.03, not $0. But regardless, unless this token works in some
    very unusual way, you still have 30 TRX, no matter what their value is at
    any given moment. If the value later goes up then you can sell them for
    whatever you can get, and maybe turn a profit. (Big "if", of course.)
