Half Guard Top to Three Quarter Guard Top
Back transition to Mount
Mount Heel Escape
Side Control Escape to Half
Electric Chair Sweep from Lockdown
Head and Arm triangle
Ezekiel Choke
Americana
Armbar from guard
Omoplata from guard
Triangle from guard
Knee in Butt Crack Guard Pass
Single Under Pass
Sit up sweep
Kimura from guard
Guillotine from guard
Electric Chair To Back Take
    Starting in halfguard bottom with underhook and close to lockdown.
    Stay in close to the top player, on your right side, left arm hugging around the waist with your left ear on their belly button.
    Weave the right arm under the opponents left thigh.
    Secure the lockdown (left leg over, right leg hooks left foot and right foot hooks opponents right shin)
    Boost opponents left leg over your right shoulder, while extending down with the lockdown
    Grab around the opponents left thigh, bringing it in close.
    Continue to sweep towards the left. The opponent will likely post with both hands to prevent the sweep.
    Grab the opponents right hip with your right arm.
    Continue to turn towards your left side, switching your hips so your right knee is on the ground.
    Shrug the opponents leg over your head.
    Reach up to the oppenents right shoulder with your right arm, going for seatbelt
    Release the right foot of the lockdown, and use your left foot to create space for the right hook.
    Slide the right hook in for the first hook.
    Stay tight on the seat belt.
    Continue on to securing the back from strong side hook.
Classic Mount to Rear Naked Choke
    Start in classic mount, bottom player on his left side.
    Top player, sit on your left knee, right leg over the oppenent scooping under his bottom side armpit, with weight heavy behind the opponents right shoulder.
    With the right hand, secure the 4 year old grip on the opponents top side arm as best you can.
    With the left hand, grab under the opponents head to his left shoulder.
    Slide back to your right hip, attaching yourself to the opponent and forcing him to come with you.
    Establish seatbelt and hooks as soon as you can.
    Switch your hips to the right, bringing yourself and your opponent to your left hip.
    As you switch the hips, start to bring your left hand around the front of their neck to their right shoulder as best you can.
    You might just get over the chin, but whats important is creating enough inches to advance grip control.
    Another important point is pressing your left arm as far through as possible. If you can have your left armpit covering their left sholder, that's better.
    Release the 4 year old grip on the right hand and place it on the back of the opponents right shoulder.
    Press the right shoulder away while keeping your left arm as deep as possible.
    Grab the opponents right shoulder with the left hand. The closer to the spine you can get a hold on them, the better.
    Establish short choke grip with the left hand behind the opponents right shoulder, and right hand gable gripping and torquing against the opponents back.
    Extend here with the left hook until there is enough space to acheive butterfly hands safely.
    Slide the right hand plam down over the left until the left hand slides into your right bicep, remembering to maintain the left hook pressure.
    At this point, if there are hands or chins in the way, ignore them; the choke is locked in and you will be able to hold it longer than they can defend.
    Slowly increase pressure with the left hook.
