In the beginning there was a void. It was not the Void, or The Void, but
instead simply "a void", the only one of its kind, always being nothing
and never being something.

Others have names for this phenemenon, or concept, that vary from
religous to scientific to agnostic to everything that you could perceive
in between. Space is given the name of all things outside the realm of
human existance, or any existance at all, but instead that space where
something may reside, but currently nothing is.

Another name given to this void in eastern culture is the Dao, or the
Tao, the Way, and the juxtuposition of the Yin and the Yang, merged
together as One Way, The Way, the way that is always straight yet ever
turning. For in this Eastern Culture, the Dao is given as the thing that
existed before things existed.

In Middle Eastern culture, you have God, Yaweh, the Eternal, the Holy
Trinity, Allah, the Father, and many other names given to this thing
that existed before existance meant anything. However, this God or
Father is the same to the Dao in many ways, of which the one namely that
they are both concepts that have the claim to being more fundamental
than the concepts of Space and Vacuum and Nothingness. They both require
intuition in understanding, as they each have their own difficulties in
grasping the various concepts that their respective works, the Dao Te
Ching or the Bible, the Old Testament, the Holy Book, and many others.

However, in one key way does the Dao exist in a different way than God
or Allah. For the people that advocate for a model of life stem around a
Central figure, usually capitalized as such, would have the people who
subscribe to their philosophy make patently absurd claims like 'there is
a God who is above all else' or 'Jesus was a human being that died for
over 48 hours and rose back from the dead.' Claims like this only serve
to hurt the true message of Jesus, which is that of a mythology, the Son
of God who comes down to Earth to sacrifice himself for the sake of
Original Sin as commited by Adam Son of God and his wife Eve, the first
lady of all that lives in the void.

For alas, I stray from the concept of the void. The dao is much mor like
the void than God is, for God created something out of the nothingness
that is the void, while the Dao did and does no such thing. The dao is
not a "God", it is just simply an intuition that seems to apply to a
great many things in life, and in its union creates a beautiful and
wonderfully disconcordant harmony.

There is also the view of Tolkien, in the Silmilarrion, he makes the
claim that all of things in Middle Earth began with the music of
Spirits, or Auiun, and that there was nothing but the music of these
spirits, not even the sense of sound, but instead of only the great ebbs
and flows of the soul that one might feel when getting really stoned and
listening to Pink Floyd's iconic 'Dark Side of the Moon' (These are of
course my words and not Tolkeins, but I would hope he would find my
sense of humor at least helpful in describing the beginning of his world
of Arda).

Regardless of Tolkein though, there is this always present concept of a
void, and what I like to do is instead of understanding where the void
leads at an academic level, I beleive it is important to live your life
in a way where you can expect a certain level of knowing what the face
of death looks like. In doing that, in understanding that all things
came from somewhere, and that all things will come to pass, one has the
sense that you can begin to see yourself in the view point of one little
ape in the vast world of 7 billion and rising we have today.

Also, if we are going to be completely honest right now, I am high as
fuck, so please take everything I have written so far with that grain of
salt.

Before we continue with the free writing, I just want to say one thing.
I think I'm mostly done. I openly wept reading the very last chapter of
Book 6 of the Lord of the Rings, and the Return of the King

--

    For alas, even in the beginning was the void not empty And it is in
    this lack of emptiness that something must come.  But what is this
    lack of emptiness? Some may Call it God, Our Lord, but that would
    not be entirely accurate, As God was born after this. But no, this
    is the Way, the Tao, This fusion of Yin and Yang is the birth of all
    life, For in that all but the most rare are like this Tao.  Yes, it
    is in this Tao that the Void was made Full.

And out of the void came first the Yang, to find order in that which
does not exist. As the Yang sought to find Order, so the Yin was needed
to guide the Yang, and create Chaos for him. For in this beautiful
chaos, a sort of return to the other side of nothingness that everyone
will come to know, only in that can we find order in this universe. For
there was no Order in the Void, only Emptiness, and neither was there
Chaos. But in these things, Order and Chaos, Yang and Yin, Black and
White, Male and Female, the thing underlying all these things, their
fusion began to create magnificient ideas.

And thus in the beginning of days when most everything was just a void,
Yang and Yin began to dance, their playful dance, as if two fairies had
resolved to live eternal lives believing each in their own isolation
unaware of the others existance, only to find your companion and
soulmate but by coincidence, or chance, but a chance that is always
meant to happen, and in this way, Yang and Yin held hand in spirtual
hand so they may dance through the void and create in it both Order and
Chaos.

One first must generate Chaos to have Order, and thus Entropy was born,
a fundamental feature of the fusion of Yin and Yang, for the Yin cannot
exist without the Yang, and in this way the Yang can never best the Yin,
and forever is the universe moving towards the Asymptote of Entropy, a
great plain on which all things ebb and sway through the river of the
universe always in the direction of the Yin, but never in exclusion to
the Yang, for indeed it is the Yang which enables the Yin.

And on this Asymptote of Entropy the Yang and Yin both danced, together,
exploring how they might balance themselves on the line of Entropy and
create wonderful and beautiful things. At first they could only create
tiny charges, particles in space, but they never knew where they might
be at a given moment.  In this way, particles were born, but not as a
projectile, and not as an energy, but of something different, an unknown
quantity, unknown even to the Yin and Yang that birthed it.

Alas, though, whilst balanced on the line of Entropy, these unknowns
become less interesting and more known, for in a Multiverse of
existance, a suitable ammount of randomness will always converge in some
way and with whatever amouunt of strength on the Yin and the Yang, the
Dao, the One Way that flows through all of life, and those things that
do not converge but instead diverge are not the bother of such worthy
and majestic being of spiritual non-energy such as the Yin and the Yang.

And so the Yin, in unison with the Yang, gave birth to many things, all
of the things that give life, for in every living and non-living thing
exhibits a life born out of Yin, with an eternal lust for Yang, and it
is in this lust of the Yang the the Asypmtote of Entropy sways ever
steeper into the depths of Chaos.

For indeed, the assypmtote of symetry began flat, holding the essence of
life as but grains of sand, and as the sand began to shift and mold and
become the mode of life as seen by both being and non-being in all of
the times that ever have been and ever will be, this shifting of sand
began to shift the very Assymptote of Entropy itself, and in this way a
Order, at one end of the Asypmtote, and Chaos at the other. It is in
this way that all things may flow from Order to Chaos.

--

Indeed, there is no true beginning before the dawn of time in the place
that the Humans name the Universe, for time had no dawn and will
continue to tick forever on towards the future just as much as it ticked
forever on in the past.  In this way, the beginning of all things known
to Man does not exist, but instead only converges to a point that can
only be derived in a conceptual nature. It is this point, the point that
is fundamentally non-existant, that can be called the beginning of time.

And in the beginning of time, there was naught but a void. This void has
many names in human tounge: Nothingness, Space, Emptiness; but whatever
the name, the defining characteristic is lack of anything, conceptual or
physical, as such can only exist in the beginning of that which has no
beginning. Neither Suffering nor Lovingness can exist in such a place,
as each of those must take root in the Real, but instead only the deaf
sound of a vacuum or the blind sight of the eternal darkness could be
seen or heard.

But it is not so that at any time the Universe could be found in such a
state, for only by venturing indefinetly to the past can one find the
Universe closely resembling this void. But always in time there has been
the Aether, working in harmony with the void, and creating in it all of
the facinating things that Man would come to know as Reality.

However, Man, in their infinite lust for Knowledge and Power, would
attempt to describe this reality and discover a Theory of Everything,
giving laws describing all of Nature and its Being. But in this quest
Man is foolhardy, as he ever is, as such a Theory cannot be described
within the context of the Universe containing it, and as such Man is
always doomed (or gifted) to strive forever closer to a Theory which
will never be quite exactly what can be contained in Everything.

But while the Aether fundamentally cannot be described with itself, it
can still be understood as the creator of Chaos, from which particles
and energies were formed. And out of this dance of Mathematics these
particles formed groups, and these groups formed bonds, and the bonds
would collide with other bonds and transform and mold those bonds into
new and strange configurations, in each way always being somehow
different than the last, but always following a pattern, given by the
Theory of Everything that does not exist, and in this pattern Galaxies
began to form. First plasmas, then stars and gases, and finally after a
great history of particles and energies that no man can ever hope to
begin to tell in any of its profound glory, planets and living organisms
as we see them today.

For the Aether will seek to create Chaos, and the Void will seek to
create Order, and such Chaos was born in the void and Order was born in
the Aether, as the Aether and the Void are but two names for same thing,
a coin that bears two sides that are forever linked in all the past that
ever has been and all the future that ever will be.

And to the Angels and Eternal beings of the Heavens this Aether was
named Pandemonium, for in this dual the Aether was all that there could
be in their pardoxical beginning, and the Eternal Peace accompanied the
Pandemonium and in such a way created Order out of that which has no
Order, just as the Aether flowed through the Void of the Universe of Man
and created Chaos in that which has no Chaos. And all of the properties
of Nothingness for the Void in the Realm of Man applied just as well to
Pandemonium of the beginning of the Realm of Angels, for in any
paradoxical beginning the only thing that can be is Nothing, and it
cannot be the case that Something is allowed to be.

In this way, Duality is born, existing in both the Realm of Man and the
Kingdom of God. Duality would go by many names, but to those in the
Realm of Man who professed the Kingdom of God, they would call it the
Holy Spirit, that flows through all things and carries out the will of
God. But many other names this has been given, and in the land of the
Angels this Holy Spirit was simply called the Dao, which translates to
The Way in human tongue.

And so in the Realm of Man the Void would dance with the Aether and
create all of the myriad of things, dooming Humanity to Chaos and
Disorder through the passage of time; and likewise, in the Realm of the
Angels Pandemonium would be wed with the Void, the void being called
Paradiso in Angelic tongue, meaning Eternal Peace, and in so doing would
create through destruction, as a mold creates a statue, Spirituality, as
this Realm of the Angels is called by the tongue of its peoples.

And through the lens of Duality, ever present in each of these Realms,
is one of the Universe able to glimpse into the Realm of the Angels just
as a being of Spirituality is able to peer into the Realm of Man. For
duality not only is created within each realm, but across it as well,
and in this way is able to create Symmetry at their intersection. Alas,
if Duality is to be fundamental to all beings living in either Realm of
all the Cosmos, Duality itself must have a Dual, and so Symmetry is made
across the Universe and the Spirituality. For in the Cosmos, Symmetry
and Duality are the Yin and the Yang that bind the Realm of the Living
and the Realm of the Eternal.

--

So right now I want to talk to everyone about fiction. Not fiction per
se but actually verse. You see, both verse and prose have the qualities
that you can divide them up into sentences, each sentence containing a
complete thought. However, the difference is in verse, the tone and
articulation and speed and other such factors also play a role in this
sort of function, as what are periods but the representation of a pause
at the end of an idea, a pause that, when spoken aloud, is indeed a
physical phenomenon.

So in this way, punctuation was created to identify different levels of
pause, and of tone, and also a way of grouping words into structures to
make the verse easier and perhaps even more fair looking than a block of
words. For how should I know that that adjective goes with that
conjunctive lest I see a semi-colon showing what describes whom, and
where to block things into logical units.

And as written word became the primary mode of communication between
author and subject, (subject meaning the reader, as it were), these
punctuations begin to mean more towards the art of syntax and structure
than the art of what it sounds like when spoken aloud.

So perhaps a period doesn't mean a long pause, but instead indicates the
end of a string which should be interpreted by the parser as the thought
of a new sentance from scratch relative to the old one, and to create a
new parsing branch with which to work.

Of course, Computer Science nerd talk out of the way, all I'm really
saying is that punctuation no longer means any actual physical form,
other than that it was born out of a need to express that in written
form. Coming to accept the fact that the evolution of punctuation in
writing has its roots in spoken verse (often greek or latin), and has
since evolved to mean a grouping of thoughts and clauses in a sentence.

--

So I just took a huge hit of weed, and feel as though I have discovered a more
or less intuitive way to narrow down a piece. We are going to use the excerpt.
So everything in a book happens at certain points, and at those certain points,
we can create mile markers as sorts. E.G. Here begins the description of
Boromir, here ends the description of Boromir. This marker system has the
advantage that it "goes over" the text. I'm not sure the most ideal way to
store a marker. One way would be to put "Comments" througout the text. So text
inside of say underscores would be meta information placed by me about
markings.

Also, while we're at it, why am I not using xml? xml is perfect for this. Well,
sql works too, but for importing, xml all the way.

So my import might look something like this.

<Silmarillion>
    <Quenta>
        ...
        <Chapter No=17>
            <Title>Of the Coming of Men into the West</Title>
            <Section Order=1>
                <Summary>First encounter of men and elves</Summary>
                <Paragraph Order=1>
                    <Summary>Finrod hunts with Maglor and maedhros to the north of Ossiriand</Summary>
                    <Text>When three hundred years and more were gone since the Noldor came to Beleriand, in the days of the Long Peace, Finrod Felagund lord of Nargothrond journeyed east of Sirion and went hunting with Maglor and Maedhros, sons of Fëanor. But he wearied of the chase and passed on alone towards the mountains of Ered Lindon that he saw shining afar; and taking the Dwarf-road he crossed Gelion at the ford of Sarn Athrad, and taming south over the upper streams of Ascar, he came into the north of Ossiriand.</Text>
                </Paragraph>
                <Paragraph Order=2>
                    <Text>In a valley among the foothills of the mountains, below the springs of Thalos, he saw lights in the evening, and far off he heard the sound of song. At this he wondered much, for the Green-elves of that land lit no fires, nor did they sing by night At first he feared that a raid of Orcs had passed the leaguer of the North, but as he drew near he perceived that it was not so; for the singers used a tongue that he had not heard before, neither that of Dwarves nor of Orcs. Then Felagund, standing silent hi the night-shadow of the trees, looked down into the camp, and there he beheld a strange people.</Text>
                </Paragraph>
                <Paragraph Order=3>...</Paragraph>
                ...
            </Section>
            <Section Order=2>
                <Summary>...</Summary>
                <Paragraph Order=1>...</Paragraph>
                ...
            </Section>
            ...
        </Chapter>
        ...
    </Quenta>
</Silmarillion>

Let us say that the paragraph is the most atomic unit for our purposes. Every
event will happen at certain paragraphs, and we can reference them uniquely by
Novel, Book, Chapter, Section, and Paragraph numbers.

A list of events will be a list of named events, being as descriptive or not as
the author wants, each with a reference to the paragraphs where the event is
drawn from.

Not only can there be events, there can be exposition. Rowling describing the
manner in which Harry kept his hair is not an event, it's not something that
happened in the world of Hogwarts, its simply an observation about something
that was already in the world of Hogwarts.

Dialogue can be considered a part of one event (Diane and Lora discussed
matters of politics and make-up) or of one section, (Horatio replied with great
remorse to the troubled Hamlet, reminding him that his father is truely as dead
as they come).

Every event can have metadata associated with it. For instance, in Tolkien,
when Aragorn and company go through the paths of the dead, we know that it
happened on xyz date of the Tolkienian Calender, so we could include that as
part of the event where they step onto the paths, even though you can't derive
it from the text the event references.

Likewise, events can portray foreshadowing in one form or another. If this were
the case, the events will be coupled in a n to n relationship, where every
event has a list of events that reference it or are referenced by it.

Events also have characters associated with them, so for instance, the event
where Vadar reveals to Luke that he is his father has only 2 characters in it,
Vadar and Luke. If Luke references Obi-Wan, he doesn't count in the list of
primary characters, but secondary characters. The primary characters are only
those characters that are present at the time and scene of the event.

Which also requires we have a list of characters just floating about. Or items,
as you could state more abstractly. 

--

You know what, I just don't want to. I feel as though every time I lay eyes on
Alliant's codebase, I get stupider. Like, a lot stupider. As in, not just as a
programmer but as a human being. It's not healthy and I don't like doing it,and 
but really I'm just being dramatic. But regardless, I should work to remove
those things that hold me back from my life. It's not going to happen in a fell
swoop or in one long pound of an anvil, but recognition is the first step and
this is me recognizing the need to adjust the place of Alliant's code in my
life.

--

Life is a mystery. Everything is unknown. Beauty is everywhere.
Apart from my body, what am I? but a lone soul
Flying aimless in space, no where to land, but everywhere to fly;
Away, fly, go,
Leave this place, let the curiousity of the world consume you, go out,
Be fruitful so that you may consume it, be kind so that you may have peace.

I am uncertain my purpose in writing here today, but I must say that what I
just wrote is a bunch of nonsense and I am honestly quite ashamed that I even
wrote it.

That is how one has to learn, however. I must say, and this applies to a lot of
music as well, but poetry has a place in my mind but not in my heart. This is
why. If I tell someone that I like poetry, they have this conception of someone
snobbish in their adherence to things like metre and ryhme, and quite frankly
it can be quite repulsive if taken to its extreme. But instead, I simply enjoy
poetry, not because I think it is some how superior to other means of art or
anything like that, but because I find poetry quaint, and the hoops and hurdles
poets may go through to make their works have 17 different layers titilates the
features of my brain which are constantly set to unwire the structure of
anything and everything that is put in front of it. Quite honestly, there is a
lot of poetry I don't like, which is another very good reason why I don't tell
people that I like poetry; it is quite an untrue statement, and if not untrue
than it must be tautilogically true. But regardless, certain poetry can really
wrap me into it, especially when the poetry is mythology that all references
eachother, and finding references in one work regarding another yields
facinating discovers about what works were popular or well known at the time of
the writing of the reference. Just another way to titlate the features of my
brain that are fascinated with this sort of thing.

I want to craft amazing sentances.

Here are some sentences that could go into the story of Fice.

(I want to experitment with a top down approach to story telling, we'll see if
there is a good result)

To say that Fice is the Devil is no more correct than saying that God is our
Savior, or that Buddha is the Enlightened; all of these things are true in many
contexts but false in the context that represents sane human thinking.

Fice was born brother to twin siblings Yin and Yang, all three being step
children of the Dao, and although Fice will never allow himself to show it,
espceially not now that his heart has darkened permentantly to char and his
will has galvonized into solid unrelenting steel that only Hephastus himself
could even attempt to heat, he loved his sister, with the sort of love that
starts pale green in your chest and expands to ever calculating and ever
growing vines through out your entire being as you gaze in the wonder of the
vines that entangle and intermix your being; all love such as this that will
grow overlong will only grow thorns and seek to harm the person that feels for
this. Indeed, the love of one such as Fice can only mean selfish desires in
mutual benefit, and when there is lack of mutual benefit that is only a
downside if the benifit still flows in the direction of the Fice; with this
sort of being, love will always grow thorns.

Indeed, that is what it did, because at first Fice could control his feelings,
and let his love of his sister be of fondness and beauty, true innocent beauty,
but it was only in his nature as the instrument of his fate to allow that
beauty to consume him, and engulf him in its ever growing want for resolution
and climax. At first Fice was strong, as everything born out of the Dao is
strong, and harnessed his power and led his will so, but all that relies on
strength as the cornerstone for foundation is sure to fail, in the allotted
amount of time given by the maximum endurance capability of that strength, and
this is true for Fice or even the Dao. And so at long last Fice's strength
gave, and in the ignorance of his youth he had not become wise enough to avoid
the temptation of the forbidden cave in his heart, and stepping into that cave
he dwelt ever deeper.

And in that cave he went spelunking, having found a physical manifestation of
his experiences, in his folly and lack of wisdom he would step into it and
explore. And this is the characteristic of the Fice, what makes the Fice the
Fice and not God or Yahweh or Allah or any other mythos; the Fice will always
give in to his temptations, and will only seek to guide or throttle his
temptation if it will lead to greater delayed gratifaction in doing so. He will
explore every dark cave of his soul, and dark things he will find there. And
seeing the dark, and letting it become ever present in his soul, he will
eventually forget the light. Losing himself in the caves of his thought, light
will become a distant memory, a remembered phenomenon that, now that he found a
place where he could navigate without it, would become a quaint memory of
previous annoyance, an object which would only seek to illumine that which Fice
wanted to keep secret not only to those he interacted with but also himself.
For this reason, Fice would ever continue to seek the deepest and darkest
places of the caves of his mind, and lose himself indefinitely there. Indeed,
in doing so, Fice can forget even his most basic roles as a Mythos in this
world, but it will not matter to him because he has literally forgotten, rather
than simply pushed aside. This would be what those with a body call a close
call with an overdose of heroin, but for Fice the release of Death can never
take him out of withdrawal, and so he spirals into the release of Empiness and
Darkness that falls there.

But, having explored the Caves of his Mind, Fice eventually became bored, and
would get to a point where going more layers deep only served him to lose sight
of his own caves. So, when he came deep enough to never find an exit to the
light, the Fice would sit, and construct a world of his own in the caves of his
mind. This was the doing of the Fice, the creation of an entire world inside of
his being. There was no purpose to this creation. This creation does not have a
history, nor does it have a duality, it is simply a construction of not the
Devil's thought. This place has no name, and it requires no identity. For the
sake of being able to speak of it, it should be called the heart of the Devil,
but that would be a gross oversimplification of the vastly complex network of
colors and sounds that went on in that place. But maybe the Heart of the Devil
does evoke that sort of image, and not image of an actual beating heart inside
of a red horny devil. Either way, this place was created because the Devil got
bored of excluding himself from the light.

--

Here is what I know about sentences.

The most simple form of sentence, formally speaking, consists of a noun phrase
and a verb phrase. These kinds of sentences are rare, because they are boring,
and have no color in them. They only seek to explain. However, if used to its
fullest, this short sentence can have a lot of impact to the feeling behind an
event. However, one must take care, because this style could very easily be
considered corny and childish, to use musical terms. Here are some examples of
this most basic kind of sentence.

    Jimmy ran. [He ran and ran, for ever and ever for as long as his legs would
    take him.]

    ["You are responsible for this spill, Cadet!" the General barked.] "Am I?"
    [The Cadet thought to himself.]

    [Carl paced back and forth an uncountable number of times across the living
    room of his parents house, the undeniable emptiness giving him a sense of
    tingly chill, not describbed as horror but only a small titilation of that
    which is superstitious that lay dormant in his soul.] Carl sighed. [Here he
    was, his parents both dead, and he thinks he's hearing ghosts inside their
    old house. He knew the voices in his head were his own voices speaking to
    him in a location of great memories involving his parents (and even not so
    great memories but we won't talk about those). No, he had business to
    attend to, items to go through and sell or donate and finally a house, or
    real estate as he would soon call it, to sell. He was here to clean up.]

You can see, when used in context, they can say a great deal. However, that is
because we have other sentences to support them that you have any idea what is
going on in the story. Lets take the first example. Jimmy ran. This sentence,
when used by itself, says very little. We don't know much about Jimmy, although
we can guess he is probably of the male gender, and that he has the capibility
to run. Besides that, we know nothing about why Jimmy is running, if there are
others running, is running a common things for Jimmy? etc. etc. you could go on
like this for however many questions you want.

Take the last example, Carl sighed, as a much clearer example of this point I
want to make, that these bare sentences don't tell anything, but regardless
they can still be used to some effect in a dialogue. In the paragraph we get
the impression that Carl is hearing things in his parents place, and for a
moment has a tingling of superstition, but quickly gets over that and returns
to his task at hand. You can imagine this as a barometer that we could attach
to Carl's feelings, and at the beginning of the work, the barometer would be
pointing towards "superstitious" and throughout the work it would point more
towards "pragmatic". However, this barometer is not analog per se, and
especially not in the case where your supposed story consists of only 5
sentences, so we have to imagine a digital barometer. On this digital
barometer, which sentance can we say that the mood shifted from "superstitious"
to "pragmatic"? And of course, the point I'm leading at is that this turning
point sentence is our most basic form of sentence, the noun and the verb. Carl
sighed. With context, the reader can imagine whatever he/she/it wants about
this sigh. Is it a long sigh or short sigh? Pronunced or silent? Involuntary?
Did he say something under his breathe during the sigh? We don't know these
things, and in this way, the reader will inject whatever they feel should go
with that sight into the sentence for you. It's the job of a good writer to let
the reader inject whatever they want in this way, and in all cases have a sane
sentence come out. It is also the job of a good writer to let what the reader
injects be almost like a puzzle, but a puzzle that is always easy to solve, so
that when the reader injects, it activates his thought processes. But the final
point I'm trying to get at is that this bare bones sentence gives the reader a
lot of freedom to empathize with Carl, and I would argue a bit too much freedom
to empathize however they please. In this instance though, the reader injects
the surrounding context into the sigh, so they have a pretty good idea of what
the sigh is probably like, and readers can even argue about it on reddit with
quasi book club meetings.

My second example illustrates a much narrower, yet more important, point about
this kind of sentence. Am I? is the sentence, but the important thing here is
that it is being used as the thought process of a Cadet. Now this is a small
and subtle thing, but you can imagine a more bright and less dim witted cadet
might say something like "I disagree but will follow your command, General" but
this Cadet only blandly questions the general internally with the words "Am
I?". This gives him a sort of subtle yet implied dimwittedness, perfect for the
kind of character who isn't so dimwitted that you have to explicitly point it
out, yet still a sort of dimwit in a way that you don't want to be made
explicit. So it can be used to show a sort of short-mindedness of characters.

==

So enough about the noun phrase verb phrase sentence, these are boring, lets
talk about the real sentence, subject verb directobject.

    The boy masturbated furiously.

Is a much better sentence than

    The boy masturbated.

And this is what I want to illustrate with the direct object. To me, this is
the true bare bones sentence, as you can say so much using just prepositions
and noun phrases.

    The people of Elu Thingol, bearer of a Silmaril and ruler of the Kingdom of
    Arda, fought valiantly against the Easterlings.

Removing the adjectives yields

    The people fought against the Easterlings.

Compare this to

    The people fought.

The first sentence tells so much more, where the second sentence tells very
little.

So the point here is that the Noun, the Verb, and the Direct Object are the
cores of any sentence, combined with conjunctions and such to combine the
phrases, along with abjectives and adverb phrases along the way where
appropriate.

--

Okay, so I'm talking again. I have an idea of a story where a character wants
to accomplish something. He is met with obstacles along the way, to the point
where the character wants to give in, but he perservres. In fact, on of the
main motifs of this character arc will be his mental process and stream of
consciousness (as told from someone who might be analyzing that characters
actions and determining what the stream of consciousness might be), will the a
sort of constant desire to give up on the journey or quest or goal or whatever,
but through the stream of consciousness, we see the character struggle with
this idea and overcome it, finding goodness in the world and coming
(incorrectly) to the conclusion that life is fair, and that those that work
hard are always rewarded in some way, not always immediately but certainly in a
tangible way. Then, as the hero comes to the end of his quest and is finally
able to reflect on the fairness of his actions and the fruits of his labor,
some coincidence happens, something that no one could predict or prepare for. I
don't want it to be something like a car crash (which would be distinct from
the original conflict) but instead I want this thing, this coincidence, to
direcetly affect the quality of the fruit of his labors. First thing that comes
to mind is a character that is building a business, and through the hardships
of the business, he is finally able to get to the point where he can finally
start running his business (and maybe he even is able to run his business
successfully for a little while), but then legislation comes around which makes
the product of his business entirely illegal, forcing him to come to the
decision to run his business underground, but since he is new and learning
everything, he gets caught and arreseted. This is a sort of weak example
(implausible, that is, and over the top) but illustrates the idea of what I am
trying to present. A character overcomes hardship, and internal conflict, and
becomes the most complete version of himself in the context of the story, only
to have that taken away from him by coincidence. The point of this is to write
something along the lines of this paragraph.

And then, one of those things happened that no one can truly describe. The
religous might call it the will of God, and the skeptic might call it a greatly
unfortunate coincidence. However, the individual subjected to the experience
would simply say "I can't believe this is happening." And that is the crux of
these sorts of events: belief. It is these kinds of events that might cause the
skeptic to say, "that lined up too perfectly to be coincidence," and it could
bring the religous to say "what sort of god would allow such an unjustice?" It
is these events which cause those with beliefs to question them, no matter
where on the spectrum of beliefs those beliefs are, and through these events is
how past resolutions can be shattered and stronger beliefs are formed. Not more
correct beliefs, mind you, only stronger beliefs; indeed when this new belief
is formed, and others might later question the belief, the believer might
recall the story of their greatly unfortunate coincidence as if that provides
full undeniable proof of their claims and hope to move on to the next subject
of disscussion.

After this I would then move on to descibe the coincidental event, and follow
up with the ramifications of it to parties involved.

Obviously this paragraph needs some work, but this is the jist of what I want
to say.

Also, I want to note that the paragraph above is very abstract, in the sense
that it can apply to any event that happens like this. In fact, that makes me
beleive that I have come to something that is a sort of revelation about works,
and that is that these sorts of paragraphs could be inserted into any work
where this sort of event happens and mark the beginning of a section of the
story.

--

I have recently had the idea of a variation on the unlawful good character, him
being unlawful not because he will intentionally break the law in order to
acheive a greater good, but because the law simply does not concern him, and
considerations of the law don't factor into his decisions of right or wrong. I
am not sure how much I want this to be simple ignorance, (and some of it should
be) but I want this to be a character that never lets the law interfere with
his ability to do good. This is seperate from a Robin Hood character, this
character does not have some grandiose socialist motivations that he takes it
upon himself to act upon. No, instead, this character lives by his kind hearted
and firm attitude to always do the right thing no matter what the consequences.

I suppose in a sense this would almost be a Jesus character, Jesus always going
against the laws of the Jewish at the time, but always striving to do what is
right. However, I am not sure if I want this character to struggle with his
unlawfulness or not. A confident, noble character that is unlawful could come
across as saintly, while a less confident character I feel would be more
interesting, but less strong. I want there to be strength in this characters
reslove, especially in the moment of what needs to or should be done, but I
would like this character to reflect on his unlawful acts after they are done.

I am not sure what sorts of unlawful things I want this character to do. Of
course, a lot of this has to do with the setting they are. One could easily
construct a setting where there is a tyrancial dictatorship, and have this
character constantly oppose the obvious injustice of their legal system, but
this is too easy, too contrived, and not nearly as impactful as having a
setting where there is a much more fair legal system, perhaps even a utopic
world where there is an entirely fair legal system, whatever that may look
like, but still will disobey the law in the interest of doing what is right.

The more I think about this character, the harder it is I think to pull it off.
I certainly don't want him to simply accept his punishment, as Jesus did, as I
want to create a much stronger character, one that will act unlawfully even in
the face of judgement. I am still conflicted on just how unlawful I want this
character to be. Obviously, I don't want this character to judge the judge, so
to speak, and deliver punishment to him. I also do not want this character to
be altruistic in any sense. In fact, I think I want a strong theme of this
character to be reinforcement of positive behavior more so than any sense of
altruism. In fact, I want this character to have very un-altruistic tendencies.
This character might say something like, "It is not my place to bend others to
my will, because those that are bent cannot go on the straight path to
trascendence".

The path to a healthy life is a straight one, and bending the will of another
will never place them on that path. Something like that. One cannot bend
another towards the straight path. One who does so lies to himself about the
love he has for the world. Forgiveness should be a central theme of this
character, but this character does not willing dole out his forgiveness to
those who do wrong. All creatures can be saved except those who close
themselves to that forgiveness.

I want this character to be always open to forgiveness, to illustrate the point
that forgiveness is something that has to be received as much as it is given.
Indeed, something to illustrate this point might go something like this. He
offered the other his forgiveness, but the others heart was closed to it. His
soul did not want to be forgiven, because the path of the redeemed is only for
the strong, and his soul yearned not for strength but for an easy way out. His
soul yearned for condemnation, as accepting condemnation is easier than
accepting forgiveness.

--

To my wife,

I could start this letter with the simple words "I love you" but that would be
much too cliché. Indeed, words such as that only mean something to the one
saying them, and there is no assurance that the one reading them will feel the
same thoughts and feelings as the one saying them. The words "I love you" mean
something different to every individual. Instead I will say this.

I want to share my life with you. Everything I do I want you to be a part of.
Unconditionally I want to give you my thoughts, my feelings, everything that
makes me who I am I want to be a part of who you are. In the same way, I want
to know who you are, I want to always discover, always learn, always cherish
and hold and love everything that you do, throwing away my notions of what you
should be or what I want you to be and especially what I think you might me and
instead always discover as a child the you that is here, the you that is real,
the you that I know I can trust with.

Such trust is vulnerable. It must be vulnerable. And that vulnerability I
surrender to. Indeed, you who are reading this I know to be one that I can
surrender to. Such trust can be exploited, it can be used, and manipulated, and
twisted towards selfish desires. I want to give this trust to you, to give you
that which others might warp and bend for themselves, only so that you can see
it and know it and see my full, naked, uncensored and unashamed self.

Such vulnerability is not weak. Weakness is giving someone your trust when you
know it will be warped. Weakness is giving in to desires because it's easier
than standing for belief. Weakness is falling to the state of vulnerability so
that others can bend it and make it their own. Above all, weakness is when you
cannot define yourself, so you let someone else do it for you.

Instead, I want to give you my strength. I want to give you everything I work
for, everything I cherish, everything I hold dear, because when it comes time
to share such vulnerability, I know that you have the strength to bear that
vulnerability with me. I want to share our vulnerability so that we can build
our strength together, each in our own way, but also together, as three. Two
bases with one peak, the apex of the triangle that is the love we share with
eachother.

This is what I mean when I say I love you. I give myself, in strength,
unconditionally to you.

--

So I want to do a bit of a review of Final Fantasy XV. This is going to be a
doozey, as there are a lot of things that I feel like this game did right on a
superficial level, but very very wrong on a fundamental level. I'm a tad
conflicted about this game, because on the one hand I want to call this the
worst Final Fantasy game I have played, and I think subjectively that is the
case, but I am going to have a really hard time justifying that position due to
the "well what about" argument. A lot of things this game does wrong other
FF games have done wrong in the past, so it's hard to justify the way these
wrong things are done over the way they were done wrong in the past. There is
quite a lot that is wrong with this game though, and it's going to be tough to
get through it all without rambling or sounding like an upset fanboy, so with
that preamble out of the way, I think I should just get into it.

Lets start with what this game does right. Firstly, the game looks amazing.
This first point is honestly a bit downside for me, as my machine is
approaching nine years old now and isn't running as top notch as it used to, so
I had some framerate issues and such even on low settings, but that is an issue
with my setup and not with the game. Next, the soundtrack is exactly what you
would expect from a Final Fantasy game. There are so many memorable tracks,
tracks that fit the scenario of the situation, they convey emotion and feeling,
and they have the quality that they you can listen to them and not have them
stuck in your head, which is huge to me.

These are the things that the game does explictly and entirely well. Soundtrack
and graphics. And I would venture to say that these two things are the only
things that are done entirely well. Everything else tends to have things that
are done well and things that are not done well all mixed together. And this is
where I get into the difficulty, because part of me wants to lament the
downfall of Final Fantasy into triple A eye candy, but all other Final Fantasy
games have pushed the envelope in the graphics and sound department, and there
is no reason this one should be any different. And it's not like these things
are done at the expense of anything else. These things are just done well. I
think it's just especially pointed in this particular FF because everything
else has so much mixed good and bad that it feels as though the only attention
was given to the games appearence, where as other FF games in the past it feels
like great graphics and sound are afterthoughts amongst the other well done
things. But since this game falls short in every other department, the phrase
is "well, at least the graphics and sound are good" rather than, "the graphics
and sound are good on top of everything else," giving a sort of feeling that
this is just another beautiful and superficial triple A title of the month,
which is sad.

So enough on that, lets start to dive into it. First I want to talk about the
battle system. So firstly, I want to say that the battle system showed a lot of
promise. I like the idea of real time battle systems, and also the idea of
having enemy encounters on the map itself rather than having a screen shatter
and transporting the characters to another battle dimension. So that aspect I
really like. I also like the decision to make the game more action paced, with
real time reactive events and active blocking and dodging and all the other
good aspects of an active battle system. However, I feel this game fails on one
very key aspect of any good active real time action based battle system, and
that is the feeling of learning new abilities. In Kingdom Hearts, or God of
War, and probably a few other games I'm not thinking of, you have your basic
attack button, but as you go you learn other moves that you can use. Let me
stick to Kingdom Hearts as a good example of this, since I feel that game did a
really good job at implementing RPG like elements into an action game. In that
game, you start with your simple "press X to attack and Circle to jump", but as
you continue more into the game you get more abilities. You get the ability to
block, you get the ability to dodge roll, and eventually you get the ability to
increase your combos, you get arial attacks, you get magic abilities, and in
KH2 there is even more in the way of special forms and growing energy bars and
the rest and in general, as you continue to play the game the whole of the
battle system begins to present itself as an ever expanding and growing system,
that by the end of the game you have fleshed out in all of its features and
depth. Okay, depth might be a bit far for a game like Kingdom Hearts, but
regardless, there is this sense of learning, and growth, that simply doesn't
exist in FFXV. In FFXV, you are given all of the tools up front for the battle
system. Now, that sentence makes this sound like a good thing, as the concept
of presenting everything upfront is good for those of us who are adults and
don't need our hand held as the game takes you laboriously through the system
it presents for us. But the issue is not that everything is presented to you up
front, the issue is that what is given to you up front feels like the beginning
of the game, and that you're supposed to gain abilities to add on to this
system. In other words, it feels like we're given a system that is supposed to
expand and grow as you level up and gain abilities, but it doesn't, and instead
we're left with what feels like a chapter one battle system all through the
entire game.

To illustrate my point, lets talk about how the system works. Like any good
action game, you have an attack button, and you have a block/dodge button.
There is also a button called "warp strike" in this game, which is a very fun
mechanic, but really shallow at its core. That is, you warp strike between
enemy kills, but that's all it's really used for. Then you have the ability to
switch weapon mid combat, which is sort of fun, but really just boils down to
figuring out what weapon type a particular enemy is weak to and sticking to
that as you kill them before switching to the next enemy. And then there is the
"super mode" called armbigar in this game that you use when the gauge fills up,
and in this mode you basically just hold attack as you are essentially
invincible for a time. There are also character interactions, which you use
with the D-pad. These character interactions are the only new abilities you
gain throughout the game, and some of them are interesting, but even the scope
of these is fairly limited, and learning new ones doesn't really provide much
more depth or anything to the system. And you can use items to heal, which you
will be doing a lot. And that's essentially it. Magic takes a sort of back
burner in this game, where you harvest spells from the map as you travel and
craft them into spells which give you one time use abilities, but there is a
large recharge between spells, and they are meant to be used at impactful
moments rather than thrown around as common attacks, so that is just another
superficial quirk thrown in that could very easily be dismissed.

What I've just described is the start of a really cool battle system. You can
imagine as you continue on, if this were done right, you would gain more
abilities, maybe a combo where if attack an enemy with one weapon and switch to
another you inflict more damage or something, or you could gain abilities that
use MP, which boost your strength but make you more vulnerable, or abilites
that use MP which allow you to dodge in new ways, giving you increased speed,
or increased mobility, or the ability to fly for a moment, or something, but no
such abilities exist. Every boss fight goes like this. Warp strike, attack,
dodge the quick time event, attack some more, dodge some more, warp strike to
another enemy, attack, dodge, heal, attack, dodge, heal, attack, warp strike,
and repeat. And this is the difficulty I talked about at the beginning, as you
could say this about a lot of FF games, especially the earlier ones where
battle systems weren't refined yet. The big difference is, in those game you
were given other options of growth, other abilities, other modes of attack as
you progress, and sure the battles could be broken down to "attack with move x
to win, and heal when you need to", but there is something intangible about
those systems that is lacking in this one. And maybe I'm just bad at the game,
and I wasn't able to discover the hidden depth of this system, but I loved the
feel of the game, and I find it a great shame that there is no depth to it. In
fact, the depth of this game would have to come from simply discovering what
enemy is weak to what, so I suppose you could say that where other games may
have depth in battle, this game has breadth in battle. But it's not even very
broad, you find items, you find food, you eat food, you get stronger, and the
battle system is just kind of there. You never get a sense that you are getting
better at it, you just discover, "oh, this enemy is weak to the dagger" so
where there could have been challenge, instead you just switch to the dagger
and that is that.

And this segways into the next aspect of the game that I feel was done poorly,
which is the level up system. I don't want to dwell too long here, because
quite frankly there is not much to say. There are two sliding scales that you
level up on, exp and ap. The way EXP is done in this game is sorta neat, but
nothing more. It doesn't really matter to me if you gain exp and level up all
at the same time or if you gain EXP and level up later when you rest. It's a
neat concept, and I like it better to be honest, but that's all it is, neat.
Its the AP system that I feel is lacking. AP is primarily used for a few
things. You can use AP to increase some battle characteristics, which sounds
like the abilities I was hoping for, but these battle characteristics are more
invisble, like increasing your MP bar or increased warp strike damage. So it
doesn't impact the actual way you play the game, it only makes the game more
convienent to play in the same shallow, uninteresting way. Then you can use MP
to gain character abilities, which again as I said before is generally only
superficially adding anything. But the biggest crime in this game is, in my
opinion, the conversion of your ability points into Runescape like abilities.

God, don't get me started on this. I will try to speak about this without
degrading into nerd raging, hate fueled, anger ramble, but fuck man. Each
character in your party has a different "life skill". One has scavenging, one
can take pictures, one can cook food, and the main character has fishing. And
don't get me wrong, I'm all for some fun with fishing as some relief to the
heavy adventuring that should be the core of any good RPG, but this game takes
everything that should have been invested into a battle system and converts it
into adult life simulator 3000. As you are adventuring along, (adventuring
meaning driving in a fucking car, don't get me started on that either) there
are times when the photo taking asshole sees a spot, and says, "Hey, how about
we go take a picture there". The first time I encountered this, I thought,
"cool, whatever excuse to make an interesting sidequest." So I took the quest,
detoured on the main route, and went to this photo op location. When I got
there, we took the photo, and that was it. What the actual fuck? Like
seriously, what the actual fuck? Fuck, this will just degrade into rant and I
don't care. This is fucking retarded. Like, straight mental. I don't give a
shit about the 3d model some dev created to look picturesque. I couldn't give a
flying fuck about the ravine in the middle of whatever made up world this game
is set in. Like, the Grand Canyon in the actual real world is pretty cool to
look at, because you can see the result of thousands, or even millions of years
of history and erosion, and you are given as senes of perspective as you
realize that our tiny lives are the product of thousands of years of this
process, and we are given the privledge to get a glimpse of the inner workings
of the universe which are beyond our control play themselves out into a
snapshot of the whole of the world which we are but a spec of dust in. But fuck
me if I'm going to spend my leisure time virtually walking through a virtual
world which was created by some zit faced, glasses wearing graphics designer as
he virtually created a virutal ravine that I am suppossed to have any feelings
for. The beauty of these things is not the admiration of someone putting a lot
of work into it, but rather the covering of the work that was put into it in
the sense that, as you go through the world you are meant to become immerssed
in it as if it were a world on its own, and the work of these people should be
invisible as the player is brought into the game and is unsure why he feels
connectted to the virutal world on a deeper level. That's the true beauty in
the work that people put into these immersive worlds. But fuck me sideways if I
am forced unwilling by a developer to admire their work. It's quite frankly
insulting, disgusting, and the exact opposite of immersion. The concept of a
side quest meant solely to force the player to admire the art of the universe
they created and nothing more, and not just one side quest but a whole class of
sidequests, is quite frankly appalling at best if not disgusting, repulsive,
and put frankly a complete waste of time. And the truely insulting thing is
that this is meant to be a core component of the game. Discovering new recepies
give you stat bonuses which impact the game, discovering new sights probably
adds something else that I didn't discover because fuck that. This is the end
game of this game, reduced to the meaningless acquisition of inventory and
points towards something that is neither rewarding nor interesting, and simply
put there to satiate our inate desire to make numbers in games go up for the
sake of going up. It's insulting, its gross, and it makes me want to strangle
anyone and everyone who may have advocated for this. God I wish I could get
over this but I can't, it's just sad that so much effort went in to these
pointless, meaningless quests and objectives that could have been put into
adding depth or meaning to the battle system or the story, but it's not, and
the fact that people would even think that this is a good idea or even that any
one player may have liked this aspect of the game makes me want to spill the
contents of my stomach everywhere and send a bullet through my head.

Enough of that, lets get to the last bit, which is the story. So needless quest
system out of the way, lets talk about the story of this game. It's bad. And to
be fair, the story of most FF games are pretty silly. The motivations of the
villians is usually pretty weak, but this is generally forgiven by the epicness
of the stories, along with the twists and turns along the way as you discover
the world and you discover the motivations of those in the world. And I will
say the good thing about this story, and that is that I do get a sense of
character development amongst the main cast. I do feel Noct's struggle as a
prince is forced into the role of King and the struggle of acting in a kingly
way when really you are trying to discover yourself and require the support of
your friends as you have no true idea what you are meant to do or as you cling
to hope as your situation becomes more and more desperate. Also, the part where
the chef dude loses his eyesight was a really mature moment in the story,
protecting the king at the cost of your eyesight, and coming to accept the
reality of what has happened and continuing on in spite of the emotions you may
feel in that moment. There was a line where, after his eye sight is gone, and
the people are evaluating the situation, where he says something like, "Well,
my eyes burn and I can't see, but my eyesight might return in the future...
well, that is unlikely, but we can't dwell on that now." This moment really hit
me as a truly mature moment in the character arc of that character, and touchs
on the concept of sacrifice not as something noble or as a duty, but instead as
something that came about quite by accident, and as a result of that accident
forces the characters to consider what sacrifice really means to everyone
involved, and how to move forward and continue despite what was maybe lost or
not lost. It was really mature, and a very well executed moment in the story.

But, in spite of the occasional moments of character growth, I must say that
the villian in this game is quite honestly one of the worst villians in a game
that I have ever played. Seriously. Let's get past his design. I hate his
design, but somehow I liked the design of Seymour from FFX where others hated
him, so that can be overlooked as a matter of taste. Instead, where this
villian falls is in his motivations. Basically, what we end up discovering is
that all of the conflict in the game is because this asshole is butthurt that
he wasn't made king some time years ago, and that he is somehow immortal (I
missed exactly the excuse for his immortality as a plot detail but whatever)
and that he wants to take the divine right of kingship falsly away from our
main character. It's thin, and it's silly. There is a bit of a neat
relationship between Noct and the lore of the game, as he goes to the tomb of
past kings to receive his right to kingship from the summons of this game
(gods, deities, beasts, I'm not sure), but even this can feel like an excuse to
add more chapters to the game.  And the rest of the characters are just sorta
there. There's the companions to the group, being characetrs like Cid, and
Cindy (and I'm going to ignore the blatent, unashamed fan-service there) and
that other girl that they meet a few times, as well as the Shiva character who
is Lunafreya's guardian or whatever, and the concept of the king and the oracle
coming together as one to create a sort of harmony I feel was a neat concept
that was underhanded by an assasination which I felt was pretty out of place
and didn't make much sense not only in the world itself but also as a creative
decision by Square. Like, it felt like it was there to give our character
motivation against our bad guy, but we already had that with the whole, "I'm
butt hurt that I'm not king and I want to take your kingly right away from you"
thing and that her assassination was wholey unneccassary, and made the rest of
the plot have a sense of "well, I guess we have to wrap this up now." So yeah,
the ending was pretty weak as it becomes "kill the baddey and become the king"
and Noct and Freya become connected through their spirit, or something, I don't
know, the whole plot was just sorta dumb and contrived and disconnected and
did a poor job at immerssing the player or getting them invested in the world
this game is set in.

And so there is my opinion of this game as a whole and we're brought back to
the beginning where we set out with this long winded review. All of these
things about the story, and the rest of my greivances of the game, do I think
boil down to "well, what about FF pick a number, didn't that game also have a
poor this or that or whatever also" to which I reply, yes, it did, and I
dislike those games for those things as well. However, in this game I feel like
the only places this game gets things right is on the surface, and at it's core
we're left with nothing but a hollow shell of eye-candy and technological
wonder, as the player is never rewarded for anything that happens in the game.
I will say, at the very least, at least this game does a good job at not trying
to hide it's superficiallity, and gives those players that enjoy the
superficial something of value, and gives those of us that prefer more depth in
our art to glance over all of these superficial things with minimal promise of
anything more. Indeed, I spent probably around 25 hours completing the main
quest of the game, along with another probably 10 or so hours doing some of the
hunts, because I'm a sucker for hunts and I enjoy doing that, and that is a
good amount of time to invest in something to decide that you don't like it
without feeling betrayed in the end. But even the hunts become superficial
since the battle system is pretty superficial, and the reward for completing
the hunts is advancment in photo opportunities and fishing locations, so what
the fuck ever. What the fuck ever man.

--

