So this  is a story all about how my life got twist turned upside down and I'd
like to take a minute just sit right there I'll tell youa all about how I
became the fresh prince of bel air.

So for real though, what I want to be able to do is take my stream of
conscousness and transmit it directly onto this machine. That way, I can do
things like write blogs and journal articles and diary entries and all sorts of
stuff. and not have to thkni about what is going on beneath my fingers. So
yeah, when I g et to that point, it will be a good day, I can feel as though I
am getting close to that point, but it is really just a meter of time before I
totally get there. It's difficult to do, and it takkes a lot of practice. I lke
doing it though, it's just a matter of doing so in a way where I stay
comfortable.. I will say, I do not lke the way this keyboard I am uisng is so
slanted to the left. I want to get a 69% keyboard at some point, but I haven't
done my research on twhere to find them and how much they cost and cet etc. .

Regardless, there are a few things I want to say, The first thing is that I
think Ros Namajunes is one of the most gorgeous individuals I have ever met.
Like, absolutely stunning individual. It's absurd really. And I mean that in
the least sexual way possible. In fact, I would go so far te say that my
thoughts about rose are such that I would remove any feeling of sex about her
because that really obscures the kind of human being she is. She is so beautful
in so many ways, it's quite amazing to be honest.

To start, she is an amazing fighter. She cut her hair for practicality reasons,
she doesn't wear heels because it doesn't make sense for her to, she wears
loose pants and comfortable shooes.Everything about her is absolutely spot on.
She has the most genuine heart, the strongest soul of any individual I have
seen, and speaks with the most sincerity for herself and the poule around her
and the human race as a whole. I am absolutely blown away by her heart and her
soul, and her mind, and her body. Everything about this human being is
stunning. 

That only scatches the surface too. She eembodies everything that is good in
the world, and her charcter is what everyone should be actively seeking every
day to what she seekxs. It's in that constant search for the best version of
ourselves that we find the best version of ourselves. But only for glimpses.
The window into the soul is always dynamic, and one should always understand
how that window lies in with reality.


