Act V. Scene 1.

King Henry asks Gloucester, his uncle and protector, if he has read the letters
sent by the Pope, the Emperor, and the Earl of Armagnac in France, and
Gloucester replies that he has, stating that they are written to appeal to the
king and ask for peace between the lands of England and France.

Henry, after asking his uncle what he thinks of the letters, agrees that such
strife is surely unnatural in the doings of Christian blood.

In addition, Gloucester reveals that the Earl of Armagnac, being of close blood
to Charles of France, has offered his daughter in marriage, but Henry is taken
aback by this offer, and though he wants not to have the girl, he sees its
political importance, and wishes instead to discuss matters with the
ambassadors.

(And as the Lord of Winchester, Henry Beaufort now Cardinal, enters, Exeter
sees him now newly promoted to Cardinal, and remarks to himself that the late
Henry V foresaw the cardinal forcing his power to be equal to that of the
crown.)

Henry, then begins to speak to his ambassadors, saying he agrees to peace, and
that the Lord of Winchester should go to France; also, Gloucester announces to
everyone the intent of the king to marry the daughter of the Earl of Armagnac.
Upon the annoncment, Henry gives a jewel to an ambassador to deliver to the
Daughter so she may know his answer and accept it as a token of their future
joining.

As they exit, the Cardinal stops his Legate and procures the funds owed for
promoting him to Cardinal. As his Legate goes off, he proclaims in his
thoughts his want to force authority over that of Gloucester to the point of
even mutiny if nessacary.

Scene 2.

Meanwhile, in France, at the plains of Anjou, Charles begins to discuss with
some of his lords, saying that he has news that those of Paris are beginning to
revolt again, hoping it might rally the spirits of the Lords. Some brief verbal
sparring ensues between the lords.

At that time, a scout comes bringing news: The English army has gathered
together and means to attack.

Charles, in spite of taking this news as a bit of a surprise, elects to meet
them. Burgundy agrees, saying that without the dead ghost of Talbot there, they
will surely have a much easier time acheiving victory.

In rallied fire, Charles leads his men to battle!

Scene 3.

Outside of Angiers (wherever that is) Joan of Arc monologues with herself.
Seeing the English push on and the French begin to waver, she calls to the
spirits to give her a sign or omen, but fiends appear, and she interprets this
as being forsaken by her spirits and foreshadows the fall of France.

After her monologue, we jump forward to the point when Joan of Arc and the Duke
of York fight, and in that time the Duke takes La Pucelle (Joan of Arc) and the
french flee.

As York wrestles with her, he comments on her fiestiness, to which La Pucelle
replies with snappy remarks and threats towards York and the King. At this,
York takes her away.

Meanwhile, Suffolk has taken Margaret, the daughter of Armagnac to be wedded to
the king, prisonor. At first he is stern but is quickly taken by emotion of her
beauty, and eventually comes to his sense. They have some playful back and
forths, and Shakespeare plays with the fourth wall a bit, and eventually
Margaret, after determining that there would be no rescue from the French,
gives in to Suffolk, and upon learning that she is to be the wife of King
Henry, resenting her position still, begins to walk upon her chosen path.

At this point, Suffolk takes Margaret to her Father, Reignier, and having seen
her daughter as prisoner, and hearing from Suffolk that he intends to take her
to wed King Henry, comes down from his high place to meet them.

Upon coming down, Reignier negotiates the willing exchange of his daughter for
peace in the lands of Maine and Anjou. The agreement is quickly arrived, and
Suffolk, still pushing off adulterous and treasonous thoughts, asks Margaret if
she bring any token to return to King Henry, to which she replies with
snarkiness and sly cunning.



