So this is a place where I write what I want to write, at whatever speed feels
appropiate to write it, and I write whatever it is that I want to come out, at
whatever speed I want it to come out, and that is going to be that. I am
currently getting used to a new keyboard, and I want to type on it slowly to
get a feel for how it feels to type perfectly on this thing. And the thing is,
I should always be able to type correctly like this, because I trained myself
with typeracer to do this. But if I ever make a mistake, it's not a problem.
The thing is, though, when doing the thing on typeracer, you always run into
the problem of hitting the thing when you don't mean to hit the thing, and you
end up waiting and additional extra minuets while you wait for the god damn
race to start up again. So that is less than ideal, but at the same time,
having some incentive to type perfectly no matter what, at the cost of a full
minute penelty maybe really drives home the idea of training in that way. But I
can say for sure, in this last paragraph, I have typed a few dozen mistakes. If
I had to count, I would say something like twenty five mistakes total, and many
of those were at the end on this very sentance. But regardless of that, I think
it's important to try and gauge your writing speed at 100% accuracy, and if you
are not able to do that, then we have a problem. 

But it seems as though this method, while also having of course some flaws, is
still a useful means of getting to the point where you can type freely on a
keyboard. I like this new keyboard a lot, there are just two things I would say
about it. First, I don't like how there are now tick marks on the j and the k,
or the u and the h and dvorak, or the а and о on the russian layout. It's F and
J on Qwerty by the way, in case you thought I didn't know somethingi like that.
So still, that being said, there is something to say for having these sorts of
marks on these keys. It's really obnoxcious to have to, every time I place my
hands on the keyboard, feel for the caps lock and enter keys, extrapolate a
position from there, bring my hands together, and then seperate them by 2 key
strokes after that. It's obnoxious, and really not what I want to be doing.

Second, the thing is, I do sort of miss the num pad. It's not the worst loss,
but it is still a loss for sure. I would like to have something on the keyboard
towards the end. I don't mind having the print screen and insert and delete all
on that row, that is fine, and in fact, I would recommend placing the numpad to
the right of that. It would be an extra four by four grid on the right end of
the keyboard, and it would there and ready to go. I use that a lot, and I
really like it when it's there, and now that it is not there, I miss it.

Something I say I really love about this keyboard is how nice it feels to type
on. I can write and write, and the worst thing that happens to me is that I
feel like I become a little exhausted just typeing so much. It takes a lot of
brain energy to type like this, because what I have to do is flash words up to
my brain, and when the brain hears them, it is able to abstractly remember it,
and then later send that to the typing processing plant in my brain, and it
sends it as a direct word, and the the typing processing plant uses some of the
visual memory to lay out in front of my face, a grid of finger motion patterns
that I am able to place forth onto the keys. So why this is important is in
talking about trains of thought.

So as I have just described, when I am writing, I hear words being spoken in
the depths of my consciousness, in the depths of my soul, and when I hear these
words, they just appear to me, as if in a cave or in a closed building. These
words just make a sound, in my consciousness, but the extent to which I am
aware of the sounds depends on how well I am entrentched in this so called
"Train of Thought". So if I'm in one of these trains, I don't hear the voices,
and instead, it just sends it straight to the processing center. But if I
choose to do so, I can inject a sound perceiving device in between the two
centers. So now, if my soul is not generating thoughts from itself, and it's
saying only a couple things at a time, I can inject into this soul device a
sort of amplfyer on it, something that allows me to actually hear, in my mind's
ear, the actual voice of my soul. If the soul is quiet, then I turn up the
amplifier. Eventually, if I turn up the amplifyer enough, the soul will become
an actual voice, in my head, that I absolutely can not turn off.

Once the soul is heard, and resonates, into the head, it will integrate itself
with that head. The soul, who is wise, knows, that at this moment, the human
being that it is a part of would like to have some information. But the thing
is, the soul doesn't always have the best information, and if too much
attention is given to it, it's starts to work overtime, and become overworked.
So the soul has learned not to saying anything too loudly unless the human is
ready to hear it. So the soul will wait until a good time, and when the human
calls upon it, it will come up, and it will say words to the human, words which
the human thinks are his own, but when he pays attention closely, he recognizes
that these words are not his own. In fact, they are not even the words of a
soul, they are just sounds that are always playing in his head. When this
happens, he starts to really want to listen to what the soul has to say. Even
with the understanding that there is no such thing as the soul, at times, the
illusion of one is so strong that it should be address, directly, and talked
about. And when this happens, the soul makes his case, attempts to describe
something about the world, which it has discovered as a result of taking
passenger in this body for long enough, to the human that it is a part of, and
hopefully he makes his case in way that allows him to realize something that he
had previously been blind to. With this understanding that the soul doesn't
exist, but is instead a construct of the meditators illusions, it is only in
this way, armed with the knowledge of the closest thing to truth we can get,
that we are able to confront our illusions, and make light to the things we are
hiding. Because our illusions hide our scars. The hide the things that have
happened to us. And sometimes this is a good thing. We would like to think that
childhood was all oreos and sprinkles, but if we think deeply on it, we can
think of times that childhood kind of sucked. And in thinking about these
times, what we come to realize is, we have something of a "childhood complex".
What this is is an illusion that our mind has constructed to overlay on to a
set of experiences. When this happens, the illusion starts to become the
reality. This is a good thing in some cases, clearly, but in some cases, our
illusions merely mask the scars that we are most afraid of confronting. So it
is in looking for the illusion that the most about the inner soul is revealed.

Still, when I am in the zone, I don't have a soul, I don't have an amplifier,
andinstead, I am somehow intergrated as one with the thing that before I had
called a soul. I just become it, and I become typing, and through that, I am
able to type and write and generally have a nice time doing all of that.



