FABLE II. [I.32-88]

  After the separation of matter, God gives form and regularity to the
  universe; and all other living creatures being produced, Prometheus
  moulds earth tempered with water, into a human form, which is animated
  by Minerva.

When thus he, whoever of the Gods he was,[11] had divided the mass {so}
separated, and reduced it, so divided, into {distinct} members; in the
first place, that it might not be unequal on any side, he gathered it up
into the form of a vast globe; then he commanded the sea to be poured
around it, and to grow boisterous with the raging winds, and to surround
the shores of the Earth, encompassed {by it}; he added also springs, and
numerous pools and lakes, and he bounded the rivers as they flowed
downwards, with slanting banks. These, different in {different} places,
are some of them swallowed up[12] by {the Earth} itself; some of them
reach the ocean, and, received in the expanse of waters that take a
freer range, beat against shores instead of banks.

He commanded the plains,[13] too, to be extended, the valleys to sink
down, the woods to be clothed with green leaves, the craggy mountains to
arise; and, as on the right-hand side,[14] two Zones intersect the
heavens, and as many on the left; {and as} there is a fifth hotter than
these, so did the care of the Deity distinguish this enclosed mass {of
the Earth} by the same number, and as many climates are marked out upon
the Earth. Of these, that which is the middle one[15] is not habitable
on account of the heat; deep snow covers two[16] {of them}. Between
either these he placed as many more,[17] and gave them a temperate
climate, heat being mingled with cold.

Over these hangs the air, which is heavier than fire, in the same degree
that the weight of water is lighter than the weight of the earth. Here
he ordered vapors, here too, the clouds to take their station; the
thunder, too, to terrify the minds of mortals, and with the lightnings,
the winds that bring on cold. The Contriver of the World did not allow
these indiscriminately to take possession of the sky. Even now,
(although they each of them govern their own blasts in a distinct tract)
they are with great difficulty prevented from rending the world asunder,
so great is the discord of the brothers.[18] Eurus took his way[19]
towards {the rising of} Aurora and the realms of Nabath[20] and Persia,
and the mountain ridges exposed to the rays of the morning. The Evening
star, and the shores which are warm with the setting sun, are bordering
upon Zephyrus.[21] The terrible Boreas invaded Scythia,[22] and the
regions of the North. The opposite quarter is wet with continual clouds,
and the drizzling South Wind.[23] Over these he placed the firmament,
clear and devoid of gravity, and not containing anything of the dregs of
earth.

Scarcely had he separated all these by fixed limits, when the stars,
which had long lain hid, concealed beneath that mass {of Chaos}, began
to glow through the range of the heavens. And that no region might be
destitute of its own {peculiar} animated beings, the stars and the forms
of the Gods[24] possess the tract of heaven; the waters fell to be
inhabited by the smooth fishes;[25] the Earth received the wild beasts,
{and} the yielding air the birds.

{But} an animated being, more holy than these, more fitted to receive
higher faculties, and which could rule over the rest,[26] was still
wanting. {Then} Man was formed. Whether it was that the Artificer of all
things, the original of the world in its improved state, framed him from
divine elements;[27] or whether, the Earth, being newly made, and but
lately divided from the lofty æther, still retained some atoms of its
kindred heaven, which, tempered with the waters of the stream, the son
of Iapetus fashioned after the image of the Gods, who rule over all
things. And, whereas other animals bend their looks downwards upon the
Earth, to Man he gave a countenance to look on high and to behold the
heavens, and to raise his face erect to the stars. Thus, that which had
been lately rude earth, and without any regular shape, being changed,
assumed the form of Man, {till then} unknown.

    [Footnote 11: _Whoever of the Gods he was._--Ver. 32. By this
    expression the Poet perhaps may intend to intimate that the God
    who created the world was some more mighty Divinity than those who
    were commonly accounted Deities.]

    [Footnote 12: _Are some of them swallowed up._--Ver. 40. He here
    refers to those rivers which, at some distance from their sources,
    disappear and continue their course under ground. Such was the
    stream of Arethusa, the Lycus in Asia, the Erasinus in Argolis,
    the Alpheus in Peloponnesus, the Arcas in Spain, and the Rhone in
    France. Most of these, however, after descending into the earth,
    appear again and discharge their waters into the sea.]

    [Footnote 13: _He commanded the plains._--Ver. 43. The use here of
    the word ‘jussit,’ signifying ‘ordered,’ or ‘commanded,’ is
    considered as being remarkably sublime and appropriate, and
    serving well to express the ease wherewith an infinitely powerful
    Being accomplishes the most difficult works. There is the same
    beauty here that was long since remarked by Longinus, one of the
    most celebrated critics among the ancients, in the words used by
    Moses, ‘And God said, Let there be light, and there was light,’
    Genesis, ch. i. ver. 3.]

    [Footnote 14: _On the right-hand side._--Ver. 45. The “right hand”
    here refers to the northern part of the globe, and the “left hand”
    to the southern. He here speaks of the zones. Astronomers have
    divided the heavens into five parallel circles. First, the
    equinoctial, which lies in the middle, between the poles of the
    earth, and obtains its name from the equality of days and nights
    on the earth while the sun is in its plane. On each side are the
    two tropics, at the distance of 23 deg. 30 min., and described by
    the sun when in his greatest declination north and south, or at
    the summer and winter solstices. That on the north side of the
    equinoctial is called the tropic of Cancer, because the sun
    describes it when in that sign of the ecliptic; and that on the
    south side is, for a similar reason, called the tropic of
    Capricorn. Again, at the distance of 23½ degrees from the poles
    are two other parallels called the polar circles, either because
    they are near to the poles, or because, if we suppose the whole
    frame of the heavens to turn round on the plane of the
    equinoctial, these circles are marked out by the poles of the
    ecliptic. By means of these parallels, astronomers have divided
    the heavens into four zones or tracks. The whole space between the
    two tropics is the middle or torrid zone, which the equinoctial
    divides into two equal parts. On each side of this are the
    temperate zones, which extend from the tropics to the two polar
    circles. And lastly, the portions enclosed by the polar circles
    make up the frigid zones. As the planes of these circles produced
    till they reached the earth, would also impress similar parallels
    upon it, and divide it in the same manner as they divide the
    heavens, astronomers have conceived five zones upon the earth,
    corresponding to those in the heavens, and bounded by the same
    circles.]

    [Footnote 15: _That which is the middle one._--Ver. 49. The
    ecliptic in which the sun moves, cuts the equator in two opposite
    points, at an angle of 23½ degrees; and runs obliquely from one
    tropic to another, and returns again in a corresponding direction.
    Hence, the sun, which in the space of a year, performs the
    revolution of this circle, must in that time be twice vertical to
    every place in the torrid zone, except directly under the tropics,
    and his greatest distance from their zenith at noon, cannot exceed
    47 degrees. Thus his rays being often perpendicular, or nearly so,
    and never very oblique, must strike more forcibly, and cause more
    intense heat in that spot. Being little acquainted with the extent
    and situation of the earth, the ancients believed it
    uninhabitable. Modern discovery has shown that this is not the
    case as to a considerable part of the torrid zone, though with
    some parts of it our acquaintance is still very limited.]

    [Footnote 16: _Deep snow covers two._--Ver. 50. The two polar or
    frigid zones. For as the sun never approaches these nearer than
    the tropic on that side, and is, during one part of the year,
    removed by the additional extent of the whole torrid zone, his
    rays must be very oblique and faint, so as to leave these tracts
    exposed to almost perpetual cold.]

    [Footnote 17: _He placed as many more._--Ver. 51. The temperate
    zones, lying between the torrid and the frigid, partake of the
    character of each in a modified degree, and are of a middle
    temperature between hot and cold. Here, too, the distinction of
    the seasons is manifest. For in either temperate zone, when the
    sun is in that tropic, which borders upon it, being nearly
    vertical, the heat must be considerable, and produce summer; but
    when he is removed to the other tropic by a distance of 47
    degrees, his rays will strike but faintly, and winter will be the
    consequence. The intermediate spaces, while he is moving from one
    tropic to the other, make spring and autumn.]

    [Footnote 18: _The brothers._--Ver. 60. That is, the winds, who,
    according to the Theogony of Hesiod, were the sons of Astreus, the
    giant, and Aurora.]

    [Footnote 19: _Eurus took his way._--Ver. 61. The Poet, after
    remarking that the air is the proper region of the winds, proceeds
    to take notice that God, to prevent them from making havoc of the
    creation, subjected them to particular laws, and assigned to each
    the quarter whence to direct his blasts. Eurus is the east wind,
    being so called from its name, because it blows from the east. As
    Aurora, or the morning, was always ushered in by the sun, who
    rises eastward, she was supposed to have her habitation in the
    eastern quarter of the world; and often, in the language of
    ancient poetry, her name signifies the east.]

    [Footnote 20: _The realms of Nabath._--Ver. 61. From Josephus we
    learn that Nabath, the son of Ishmael, with his eleven brothers,
    took possession of all the country from the river Euphrates to the
    Red Sea, and called it Nabathæa. Pliny the Elder and Strabo speak
    of the Nabatæi as situated between Babylon and Arabia Felix, and
    call their capital Petra. Tacitus, in his Annals (Book ii.
    ch. 57), speaks of them as having a king. Perhaps the term
    ‘Nabathæa regna’ implies here, generally, the whole of Arabia.]

    [Footnote 21: _Are bordering upon Zephyrus._--Ver. 63. The region
    where the sun sets, that is to say, the western part of the world,
    was assigned by the ancients to the Zephyrs, or west winds, so
    called by a Greek derivation because they cherish and enliven
    nature.]

    [Footnote 22: _Boreas invaded Scythia._--Ver. 34. Under the name
    of Scythia, the ancients generally comprehended all the countries
    situate in the extreme northern regions. ‘Septem trio,’ meaning
    the northern region of the world, is so called from the ‘Triones,’
    a constellation of seven stars, near the North Pole, known also as
    the Ursa Major, or Greater Bear, and among the country people of
    our time by the name of Charles’s Wain. Boreas, one of the names
    of ‘Aquilo,’ or the ‘north wind,’ is derived from a Greek word,
    signifying ‘an eddy.’ This name was probably given to it from its
    causing whirlwinds occasionally by its violence.]

    [Footnote 23: _The drizzling South Wind._--Ver. 66. The South Wind
    is especially called rainy, because, blowing from the
    Mediterranean sea on the coast of France and Italy, it generally
    brings with it clouds and rain.]

    [Footnote 24: _The forms of the Gods._--Ver. 73. There is some
    doubt what the Poet here means by the ‘forms of the Gods.’ Some
    think that the stars are meant, as if it were to be understood
    that they are forms of the Gods. But it is most probably only a
    poetical expression for the Gods themselves, and he here assigns
    the heavens as the habitation of the Gods and the stars; these
    last, according to the notion of the Platonic philosophers being
    either intelligent beings, or guided and actuated by such.]

    [Footnote 25: _Inhabited by the smooth fishes._--Ver. 74.
    ‘Cesserunt nitidis habitandæ piscibus;’ Clarke translates ‘fell
    to the neat fishes to inhabit.’]

    [Footnote 26: _Could rule over the rest._--Ver. 77. This strongly
    brings to mind the words of the Creator, described in the first
    chapter of Genesis, ver. 28. ‘And God said unto them--_have
    dominion_ over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
    and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.’]

    [Footnote 27: _Framed him from divine elements._--Ver. 78. We have
    here strong grounds for contending that the ancient philosophers,
    and after them the poets, in their account of the creation of the
    world followed a tradition that had been copied from the Books of
    Moses. The formation of man, in Ovid, as well as in the Book of
    Genesis, is the last work of the Creator, and was, for the same
    purpose, that man might have dominion over the other animated
    works of the creation.]


EXPLANATION.

  According to Ovid, as in the book of Genesis, man is the last work of
  the Creator. The information derived from Holy Writ is here presented
  to us, in a disfigured form. Prometheus, who tempers the earth, and
  Minerva, who animates his workmanship, is God, who formed man, and
  ‘breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.’

  Some writers have labored to prove that this Prometheus, of the
  heathen Mythology, was a Scriptural character. Bochart believes him to
  have been the same with Magog, mentioned in the book of Genesis.
  Prometheus was the son of Iapetus, and Magog was the son of Japhet,
  who, according to that learned writer, was identical with Iapetus. He
  says, that as Magog went to settle in Scythia, so did Prometheus; as
  Magog either invented, or improved, the art of founding metals, and
  forging iron, so, according to the heathen poets, did Prometheus.
  Diodorus Siculus asserts that Prometheus was the first to teach
  mankind how to produce fire from the flint and steel.

  The fable of Prometheus being devoured by an eagle, according to some,
  is founded on the name of Magog, which signifies ‘a man devoured by
  sorrow.’ Le Clerc, in his notes on Hesiod, says, that Epimetheus, the
  brother of Prometheus, was the same with the Gog of Scripture, the
  brother of Magog. Some writers, again, have exerted their ingenuity to
  prove that Prometheus is identical with the patriarch Noah.

