In the beginning there was Eru, named Illuvatar by the Elves, and many things
by men, some more accurate as others, such as the Tao in Taoism or God in
Christianity. However, this Illuvatar is strictly the one as described in
Tolkien's words, as there is no allegory.

Illuvatar looked out into the void, and saw a vast array of nothing. No sound
nor sight was beheld upon the void, and yet out of it, Illuvatar began creating
music. This music is not like the music heard by the ears of humans and elves,
for such things are his children and were well past conception at his birth,
but only on the brink of death can living things begin to understand the music
that the Illuvatar began before the keeping of time.

And in this throbbing of raw emotion, spirits of Illuvatar, each representing a
part in him, began to form, and each began to take a life of its own in this
void. Each spirit was an essesnce of the music Illuvatar composed in this void.
Each was alike to Illuvatar in essence, but uniquely itself in comparison to
the others that were born, and for this reason could only understand in harmony
with the others how their life fit into the grand picture of Iluvatar.

These spirits are called Ainur in the elvish tongue, and represent the spirits
of all things in Arda. And in the account of the Elvish chronicles named the
Valaquenta, the names of these Ainur are stored and kept in the song and
poetry it represents.

However, in the Ainulindale is kept a much more ancient story, the story of the
rise of Melkor in the music of Illuvatar, the dawn of the First Age, before a
world was formed and still yet the body of Pride and Hate and Deceit and
Darkness was developing itself in discord with the wonderful harmony of the
Ainur and Iluvatar. For Melkor was indeed a spirit that the elves call the
Ainur, and in his might and ability was his strength mightier than all the
others, and in his Pride he sought to play music in disconcordance with
Iluvatar, and go against the harmony of Iluvatar and the rest of the Ainur.

In this way Melkor rose to power, naught with ill intention or evil motives in
his heart, but instead with emotions such as envy and desire, and with that
emotion he created ripples in the nothingness the spirits inhabited that
created much discord and unrest in the otherwise wonderful utopia of the music
of Iluvatar.

And Iluvatar allowed him to do this, as control not he has over the Ainur, as
they are not bound to him but only seek mutual gain in the creation of great
beauty, but Melkor created the most beautiful and harmovizing works in the
beginning before the counting of days, and grew prideful of his work and
resentful of the others for not putting forth energy with as great a might as
his.

In this way, he began to act in discord with the Ainur, and as this Discord
continued, Iluvatar came from his own being a melody so great and powerful and
elegant and wonderful, that even the power of Melkor bent towards its
harmonies, for this music dawned the coming of the second age, and in this
wonderful hymn are many things told, but not so in the time before the begining
of existance, as this hymn was not a hymn but instead a vast and beautiful wave
in the place between life and death where the Eru and the Ainur dwell.

To this Melkor continued his tune, but only because it now fit within the
greater, less elegent but more refined melody of the Iluvatar, and in this
complex array of musical structure his harmony now fit. But many of the Ainur
that were born from the melody of Melkor did not undestand this second melody
of the Eru, foremost being a Maiar of Melkor, his greatest disciple, Gorthaur
the Cruel, for in all of Melkors songs, Gorthaur was included, and Gorthaur
continued the destructive disconcordance of Melkor in the First Age into the
Second age.

And again, this disconcordance rose out of the power of the harmonies, the
power of Sauron, as Gorthaur was later to be named by the men who would know
him, was only the power of Melkor, but re-imagined after the coming of the
second age.

And in this second age, Gorthaur is destroyed at first by those Ainur lasting
the second hymn, but at last by the third melody of Iluvatar, even greater in
complexity than the second and somehow paradoxically greater in elegance than
the first. For only in hearing the first hymn on its own, can one understand
the neccisity of complexity of the second hymn, and only in understanding both
the first and second hymn can one see the elegance of the third. For the third
hymn truly is elegent, and that hymn will be told in the greater ages to come
as the tale of The Lord of the Rings and the Return of the King, and is indeed
a mighty tale of a great hobbit and his quest to bear the burden of the one
ring of Sauron to cast into the land of Mordor where the shadows lie the ring
into the pit of Mount Doom where the ring was forged.

But alas, such things did not exist in the void that came in the days of
Iluvator, before days or weeks or even time itself existed. Instead, this third
wave of energy was like the great story and emotion that one feels when reading
and truly understanding the great work of the Lord of the Rings, and this
energy went wide into the world, and incoperated a great melody, which included
both the great Ainur Melkor and his Maiar Gorthaur, and this 4th melody
including all the melodies composed thus far was the greatest melody that any
living thing could comprehend. For indeed, there is a fourth melody of the
Iluvator, but no human art can describe or portray its beauty and magnificence,
except in mere abstractions or in the practice of understanding the way of Eru,
the Iluvatar, the One that comes out of nothingness, the Yin and the Yang fused
as One Way, The Way, The Truth, and The Light.

And this grand cosmic melody was composed, consisting of the dawn of the First
Age, the Rise of Melkor, the Introduction of the First melody, the Rise of
Gorthaur and the construction of the Rings of Power heralding the end of the
Second Age, and the rise of the Lord of the Rings and the Return of the King as
told by Tolkein in his 6 part epic novel, or rather as told by Frodo and Bilbo
with the help of the wise Elves, as the end of the 3rd age and the introduction
of a 4th and even greater melody.

And when this melody continued on for the rest of eternity, Iluvatar found it
within himself to create another form of existance, Arda, where he would
construct all of the energies that were sung as a new universe, surrounded by
the void but fully contained within it, and within this universe were created
the Valar and Wizards and Elves and Dwarves and Men and Ents and all of a
variety of mystical and wonderful creatures, and through this would he might
reimagine all that took place in his cosmic composition in a new form, more
concrete but less beautiful than his song.

Also in this universe was there to be death for some as a gift and for others
as a burdun, but for all as a reminder of the greif one has from the Rise of
Melkor, known as Morgoth to the Elves in the realm of Middle Earth, and his
servant, known as Sauron. And so it is that the story of the Lord of the Rings
and the Return of the King marks the rise and crecendo of the third melody to
its climax, and tells the tale that the third melody of Iluvatar intends to
tell with all of the melodies composed thus far, in all its violence and
rectification.

And it is my hope to present this tale of the Lord of the Rings and the Return
of the King in this abridged context so that all who might read it can
understand it's beauty, not only for the attention span of this generation that
could aught use a more concise version of the pinnicle of work that Tolkien has
given to us, but also because a more concise version could very easily augment
the great work as we know it today and give it a more zoomed out approach. It
is this zoomed out approach that I hope to acheive.
