The Lord of the Rings Abridged

as written by an avid fan of Tolkein's work, surnamed Webster, and going forth
into the world as Brett, son of Jerry, and true advocate for all things nerdy.

Forward:

I wish to write a breif account of the key points in the lord of the rings.
First, I will begin with the works of the Silmarilion. I will include
everything, but points that are not relevent to the Lord of the Rings will be
glanced upon, and points relevent to the Lord of the Rings will be focused
upon.

With this work, I intend to have a concise and complete work detailing the key
points that any fan of Tolkein and his Magnum Trio being the mythology of the
Lord of the Rings, the tale of the Hobbit, and the fable of the Silmarillion
should like to know. This work is concerned with taking all of the relevent
parts from the two pillar works, towers as it were, of the Hobbit and the
Silmarillion, into the true Magnum Opus, the Lord of the Rings. And it is this
Magnum Opus that I am primarily concerned, of course refusing to neglect the
pillars and instead embracing them as a vital part of the story of the Opus.

I also intend to place everything of me, Brett Webster son of Jerry Webster who
is wed to Ann Chauviere, the mother of the writer and always persistant care
giver, stopped all the way to the left, and everything written by Tolkein will
be indented 4 spaces to the right. Poetry and Prose will never be mixed, and it
will be marked if it is unclear whether Poetry or Prose, but not marked if it
is clear.

Without much further ado, I will try and keep my own humor and writting style
to myself as I write this. It will be an interesting excersize to kill my ego
in this way and instead simply be a mirror for a more concise version of
tolkein. I hesitate to say more modern as well, because the language of Tolkein
is not near outdated at this point. However, I will make clarifications on
things and say them in a more modernized way. I envision the Lord of the Rings
will be like Beowulf in the future, and the translation of the evolution of
this work from english will be nigh a difficult task for whatever 25th century
historian might decide to undertake it.

This is the beauty of Tolkien. If I could choose one living being in the world
to make immortal, it would be Tolkien. Alas, since he began as man he would
fall into the depths of darkness like any mortal thing made immortal would do,
but for my own selfish reasons, he would create the most beautiful work known
to mankind a long long time before he drifted into darkness in the Land of
Mordor where the shadows lie. Regardless, mortal men cannot become immortal,
nor should they desire such a tragedy, but the point is that I believe Tolkein
to be the most well written and well spoken individual of the 20th century, and
my 21st century tongue is still sophisticated enough to at least partially
understand both Tolkien's genuious and his beauty.

So without further ado, let us begin the abridged version of the Lord of the
Rings.
