So after I have read a bit of my own work, I have decided to do a bit of a line
by line, paragraph by paragraph analysis of it. I have concluded that the
beginning and middle are much too verbose, and a lot of the things I say could
be cut. I think I talk a little bit too much about the king, and what he is
like, and not enough about the people of the king, and I want this to be a more
nebulous sort of piece. I don't want the king, or the people, to be fully
fleshed out characters with descriptions, these things are more abstractions,
so I want that to be reflected in the writing.

    In there land there was a king. As far as kings go, this king was what his
    critics would call "okay", never extraordinary, but still keeping to his
    kingly duties and generally doing with kind heart what was expected of him
    as king. He was a figurehead for a farming town during a time of peace and
    prosperity. The king owned a crown, but he never wore it except to very
    special occasions where it was worn as a decorative piece briefly before it
    is placed to the side.  Things were what any pragmatic observer of the
    situation would call good.

This first paragraph is a good example I think of what plagues the first
section of the novel. I go into to many minute details, and I say things in
much too clever of a way.

    In the land there was a king.

I like opening with this line. I dislike the bit that comes after it though.
The sentence ends with the word king, so I think the first thing the reader
sees should be something about this king, rather then the phrase "as far as
kings go" which is a sort of anchroism.

I want the next line to be a line similar to "The king was neither great nor
bad" but that seems a bit stilted. I am considering the following.

    The king was neither a great king, nor was he an awful king.

I like ending that there. Another idea, which I think I have already dismissed,
is.

    The king was not exceptional in either the positive nor the negative.

But I don't like this because it tries to hard to use "mathy" sorts of words.

    The king was neither an exceptionally great king, nor was he an
    exceptionally bad king.

I could play with that word exceptional, although I don't like that because it
puts in the readers head the concept of "exceptional" in some way, even if the
reader is expecting a contrast to some excetpional quality that will come
later, it will never come, so I think I will avoid that word.

    The king was neither great nor awful; he was merely adequete.

I like this. When I read that in my head, I put a pause after "merely". In
fact, I don't know if that word merely needs to be there. What purpose does it
serve? I think it does need to be there, to show that he was "very much"
adequety. I think that merely fits there. So let's go with that.

    In the land there was a king. This king was neither great, nor was he
    awful; he was merely adequete.

Let's put the full orignal sentence there to see the thought that comes after
this.

    As far as kings go, this king was what his critics would call "okay", never
    extraordinary, but still keeping to his kingly duties and generally doing
    with kind heart what was expected of him as king.

So the next sentence has to say something about how he did what was expected of
him, but he did not do something of note. Something like.

    The king kept to his kingly responisibilities, but he did not do anything
    to set him apart in the line of his fathers.

    He did not do anything to set him apart form his line of fathers

So as I analyze this, I feel as though I need to take a break here. I think,
what would serve me much better, would be to create, as I do with other works
of fiction, a sort of outline from the story. So lets do that.

Okay, so I have done that now, and I have determined a few things. I wish to
write commentary on all of the sections of the work, but I will say that some
of the more inspired writing is in the ritual. I like the fact that it takes up
a good chunk of the work, as it seperates the nihilism of the king, and allows
the reader to focus on the efforts of the people to find some solution to their
problem.

I think the primary problem with it is not in the length, although for sure
there are some sentences that should be cut, but rather in the musicality of
it. I have some rather long paragraphs, and if those paragraphs were
restructured just a little, it would engage the reader quite a bit more in the
ritual, and take them to it, and engulf them in it, rather than merely
"describe" it to them. So I will aim to do that.

Also, the exposition needs a lot of work, which is understandable, because I am
pretty sure I was high when I commited that at first. That is the only section
I was high when I wrote, and indeed, it is the section that needs the most
work. Say what you will about marijuana, but I think it is best used for when I
don't have ideas to write about and I want to be inspired to write a bunch of
crap that I can sift through later. Of course, I won't be smoking any weed for
a while, but that's a whole different topic.
