Rick takes Morty into his flying saucer, saying he'll drop a bomb, and that
Morty and Jessica will be the new Adam and Eve. Morty "Takes control of the
situation."

Breakfast with Rick.

    Quotes: There is no God Summer, you gotta rip that bandaid off now, you'll
    thank me later.

    Listen Jerry, I don't want to overstep my bounds or anything, it's your
    house, it's your world, you're a real Julius Ceasar, but I'll tell you
    something, I'll tell you how I feel about school Jerry, it's a waste of
    time, bunch of people running around, bumping into eachother, guy up front
    says "2+2" people in the back say "4", then the bell rings and they give
    you a carton of milk and a piece of paper that says you can go take a dump
    or something. It's not a place for smart people Jerry. I know that's not a
    popular opinion, but that's my two cents on the issue.

Morty fantasizes about Jessica in math class.

Frank bullies Morty in the hall. Rick freezes Frank and takes Morty away for an
adventure.

    Morty: Oh, morning Frank
    Frank [Pulling knife]: What's that supposed to mean huh? You trying to say
    my family is poor?
    Morty: Oh Jeez Frank, I don't know if a knife is neccesary. I mean, you
    know, you kinda had things handled without it.
    Frank: You tellin me how to bully now? Big mistake Morty. Now I'm gonna cut
    you, cause my family is RICH.

Jerry surprises Beth during her work as a Horse Heart Surgeon, to pitch putting
Rick in a nursing home.

Rick brings Morty to C-37 to get a mega fruit on mega trees. Rick gives Morty
some grappling shoes to walk down the cliff, but Morty doesn't turn them on.

Jerry and Beth argue about Rick in her office. The assistant comes in and asks
if everything is okay. They get a call from the principle to talk about Morty.

    Jerry: By the way, if you ever have an affair with that guy, I will come
    into the hotel room, and blow my brains out, all over your naked bodies.

Rick walks down and heals Morty's broken limbs. He spends such a long time in a
future where everyone is young, and Rick spends time with beautiful young
woman, so the charge on his portal gun is out. Rick bargains for Morty to
smuggle the seeds in his rectum through interdimensional customs.

    Rick: Morty, oh, you really did a number on your legs right now. You know,
    you gotta turn the shoes on Morty, for them to work. You see, I turned mine
    on, I had no problem getting down here, it was a leisurely breeze.
    Morty: I'm in a lot of pain, Rick.
    Rick: Yeah, I can see that, but do you think you'll still be able to help
    me collect my seeds Morty?
    Morty: Are you kidding me? That's it Rick, that's the last straw, I can't
    believe, I'm sitting here with both of my legs broken, and you're still
    asking me about getting those seeds! Hoo, Oww Oww. You're a monster, you're
    like Hitler, but even Hitler, but even Hitler cared about Germany or
    something.

The principle reveals that Morty has been skipping school.

Morty walks out of the bathroom of interdimensional customs. Morty get's pulled
over for a random check. They run. As they do, Morty inhales some alien hookah,
which he coughs into a mucus that runs with them. It turns from a fetus to a
man to an old man and dies in the span of five seconds. Morty covers Rick and
they get out.

    Rick: I don't like it here Morty, I can't abide beuorocracy. I don't like
    being told where to go and what to do, I consider it a violation. Did you
    get those seeds all the way up your butt?

    Rick: I need to type in the coordinates to our howeworld Morty, cover me.
    Morty: Oh man, I don't want to shoot anybody.
    Rick: They're just robots Morty, it's okay to shoot them. They're robots.
    Morty shoots. 
    Buerocrat 1: Glen's bleeding to death, someone call his wife and children.
    Morty: They're not robots Rick.
    Rick: It's a figure of speech Morty, they're beurocrats, I don't respect
    them. Just keep shooting Morty. You have no idea what prison is like here.

The two scenes meet up. Jerry starts to unpack the garage. Rick convinces them
that he can stay by showing that Morty is smart. Turns out whatever happened
was because the seeds dissolved in his butt.

    Beth: Dad! How could you make my son miss an entire semester of school.
    It's not like he's a hot girl, he can't just bail on his life and set up
    shop in someone elses.

    Rick: Thanks Jerry, you really wear the pants around here. I just want you
    to know, between us from now on, it's going to be 100% honesty and open
    clear communication.
    Summer: Frank Poliki was frozen to death today.
    Rick: No idea what you're talking about.

    Jerry: And now Beth, if you'll have me, I would love to have you.
    Beth: You know what, okay!

    Rick: I'm sorry Morty, it's a bummer, in reality you're as dumb as they
    come. And I needed those seeds real bad, and I had to give them up just to
    get your parents off my back, so now we're going to have to go get more.
    And then we're going to go on more adventures after that Morty, and you're
    gonna keep your mouth shut about them Morty. Because the world is full of
    idiots who don't understand what's important, and they'll tear us apart
    Morty. But if you stick with me, we're going to accomplish great things
    Morty, and you're going to be part of them. And together we're going to run
    around Morty, we're going to do all kinds of wonderful things. The outside
    world is our enemy Morty. We're the only friends we've got Morty. It's just
    Rick and morty. Rick and Morty and their adventures Morty. Rick and Morty
    forever, and forever and a hundred years Rick and Morty things. Rick and
    Morty running around, and Rick and Morty time. All day long forever. 100
    days, Rick and Morty forever a hundred times. Over and over Rick and Morty
    adventures dot com, www.rickandmorty.com, www.rickandmortyadventures, all
    hundred years. Every minute Rick and Morty dot com. www one hundred times
    Rick and Morty dot com.


