Act 1. Scene 1.

We open in a scene outside the capitol, where Saturninus and Bassianus, two
sons of the late Roman Emperor, debate their right as heir to the throne.
Saturninus argues that he is first born son of the late emporer, while
Bassianus argues for Democracy in decision.

As they debate, Marcus Andronicus a tribune enters, saying that by democratic
election, Titus Andronicus has been chosen as successor. Marcus then sucks his
brothers dick a bit, telling of his ten year campaign against the goths, where
he has been successful. Marcus then urges the quarlling brothers to dismiss
their parties.

Bassianus dismisses his followers, then Saturninus does the same. With a
fanfare they enter into the Senate House.

At that time, a captain arrives making way for the entrance of Titus. Titus's
four sons, Titus, Tamora queen of the Goths, and her three sons, with Aaron,
enter with a coffin.

Titus then begins to speak, mourning the death of his son in the coffin. When
he is done, Lucius, son of Titus, asks for the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
so that they may take him as sacrifice. Titus remarks that the eldest son of
Tamora, Alarbus, is such a prisoner.

Tamora is obviously distressed by these, and plea's to Titus, saying that her
son only fought for his country as he might, asking for mercy to her son.

Titus replies, saying that it is a matter of religion, and not te be negotiated
with.

Lucius is all too excited about the sacrifice, and upon his words, Titus' sons
take Alarbus away. While they are away, Tamora cries out while Chiron and
Demetrius, her other sons, speak of their situation.

The sons of Titus re-enter with bloody swords, and Lucius proclaims in graphic
detail the killing of Alarbus. At this, the coffin bearing Titus' son is put to
rest as Titus mentions that his son can rest soundly now.

Lavinia, daughter of Titus, enters, sucking up to her dad and giving her
funeral rites to her lost brother. Titus blesses his daughter.

Marcus and the two brothers Saturninus and Bassianus re-enter now. Marcus
hails his brother Titus, who replies appropiattly. Marcus then gives Titus the
news of the election in his favor, offering him the crown.

Titus renounces the crown, saying that he is a soldier, and would rather have a
staff of honor than the sceptre to control the world.

Marcus than asks of Titus who shal be emperor. Saturninus rallies for his
cause, and Lucius rebukes him for his impatience, while Titus puts forward his
intent to choose Saturnius. Bassianus makes his case.

Having heard both, Titus asks the Tribunes if he may choose the emperor. Upon
getting permission, Titus gives the crown to Saturninus. Marcus gives the crown
to Saturnius and there is a long flourish for the occasion.

Saturnius, newly made emperor, as his first deed will take Lavinia, daughter of
Titus, as his bride, if such a motion would please Titus. Titus agrees and
offers his daughter as tribute to Rome. Saturnius thanks Titus.

Titus informs Tamora that she is now a prisoner of Rome, and Saturnius, after
an aside, asks Lavinia if she's cool with being queen, who replies that she is.

Saturninus makes to leave, but after a flourish, Bassianus seizes Lavinia.
Titus is alarmed, but Bassianus claims that it his right. Marcus also proclaims
that Bassianus seeks to seize his own, while Lucius rallies behind Bassianus.

Titus proclaims his brother and sons, stepping in the way like this, as
traitors. Bassianus takes Lavinia away with Marcus. As they take her away,
Mutius stands in the way of Titus, provoking Titus to kill him. In the fray,
Saturninus takes Tamora and her sons and leaves.

Lucius returns, calling his father unjust for killing his brother. Titus
continues to renounce his sons as traitors, requesting that Lavinia be brought
to the throne as queen as she should. Lucius argues that she is lawfully to be
wed to Bassianus.

Saturnius now speaks, saying that he does not need her, nor Titus nor any of
his kin.

Titus is taken aback by the words of Saturnius, who continues to mock Titus,
saying that his son-in-law Bassianus shall be fit for him and his treacherous
sons.

Titus is hurt by these words. Saturninus chooses then Tamora suddenly as his
queen, asking her if she would so have it be the case. Tamora replies saying
that she would be the housemaid of Saturnine if he so wished, at which
Saturninus announces her as spouse.

Titus is left alone to deliberate his misery for a bit.

Marcus returns with the sons of Titus, Marcus questioning Titus on his deeds.
Titus still rebukes his brother and sons, calling the treacherous and
dishonorable. Lucius argues, saying that they should at least give Mutius a
funeral in the tomb. Titus disagrees, saying they should not defile the tomb
fit for those that die in battle, but Marcus and the sons still plea for it, to
the point they are willing to die for it. Titus still refuses, and asks them to
leave.

The sons and Marcus kneel in front of Titus and Marcus gives case again for the
burial of Mutius. At this Titus finally disents, and they bury him.

After the burial, Marcus asks Titus how the queen of the Goths so suddenly
became advanced to queen of Rome, to which Titus replies that he does not know.

At that, the Emperor, Tamora, and her sons re-enter, while Bassianus and
Lavinia re-enter seperately. Saturninus and Bassianus have some quabbling words
to go back and forth about each new bride, and Bassianus takes a moment to
appeal to the loyalty of Titus, saying Saturninus should value Titus highly.

Titus, quick to anger, rebukes Bassianus, saying that it is he who dishonored
him in the first place.

Tamora asks to interject, and Saturnius grants to hear her. Publicly, she
speaks on behalf of Titus when it comes to his pardon, but secretly, she tells
Saturnius that she will find it in herself to await the day when she can raze
the family of Titus for his deeds.

At the words of Tamora, Saturnius asks Titus to rise and gives him pardon.

Tamora then speaks as a mediator of quarls, offering pardon for all present.
Saturnius, at the will of Tamora, pardon's the sons of Titus, and gives his
good blessing to Lavinia that she may be welcome in his house.

Titus takes his leave, and Saturninus lets it be so.

-- SECOND DRAFT --

[The first debate]
We open in a scene outside the Capitol of Rome, where brothers Saturninus and
Bassianus debate their right as heir to the throne. Saturninus argues that he
should have it as eldest, and Bassianus wants it to be brought to democratic
vote. Marcus Andronicus, Tribune to the people, annonces that it is instead his
brother, Titus Andronicus, that has been voted on by the people. At this, the
two princes finish their debate, and enter the senate.

[Lucius kills Alarbus]
At that time, Titus enters fresh from conquest of the Goth's, with one of his
sons in a coffer and four more following, and with Tamora, queen of the goths,
her three sons, and Aaron the moor. Titus mourns the death of his son, and at
the bidding of Lucius another son of Titus, they decide to take Alarbus, a son
of Tamora, as sacrifice. Lucius takes Alarbus away, to the dismay of Tamora and
her two other sons, and they kill him. When they come back, Titus' son is laid
to rest.

[Saturninus is made emperor]
At this moment Marcus announces Titus as being chosen as emperor of Rome. Titus
refuses the title, asking instead for permission to give it to whom he chooses.
Being granted, and hearing the cases of each of the two brothers, he gives the
title to Saturninus.

[Saturninus takes Lavinia as queen, Bassianus objects, Titus kills Mutius]
Saturninus, as first act as emporer, decides to takes Lavinia as his queen, if
that so please Titus. It does, but before they go, Bassianus seizes Lavinia,
proclaiming her by right betrothed to him. Marcus and the sons of Titus rally
behind the motion, and Mutius the eldest son of Titus stands in the way of
Titus, preventing him from giving chase. Titus proclaims his brother and sons
as traitors, and kills Mutius. Lucius returns, and rebukes his father for
unjust deed committed.

[Saturnius takes Tamora as queen instead]
Saturnius now stops this feud, saying he does not need Lavinia, and really
doesn't want much of anything to do with Titus after his actions, and instead
will take Tamora as his bride.

[Marcus and the sons of Titus request burial for Mutius]
Marcus and the sons of Titus return, and they request burial for Mutius. Titus
does not consent at first, but eventually is swayed begrudgingly and they bury
him with the other son buried there.

[Saturninus and Tamora pardon Titus and Marcus and sons]
Now it is up to Saturninus to pardon Titus and his sons, and at the appeals of
Tamora (for she has two faced motivations) and Bassianus, everyone is pardoned
and set to leave.

Act 2. Scene 1.

We open with Aaron monologuing about how Tamora is now queen, and how he wants
her.

Meanwhile, Demetrius and Chiron, the two remaining sons of Tamora, begin to
fight over the right and ability to Lavinia's love. Aaron interjects with
reason a few times, but Chiron fights blindly regardless, and Demetrius plays
the elder in the scuffle. After quite a few back and forths, Aaron eventually
convinces them to stop fighting, and instead to join in attempting to rape her.

Act 2. Scene 2.

Titus and his sons, with Marcus, enter the forest to begin a hunt. Next,
Saturninus, Bassianus, their brides Tamora and Lavinia, and Chiron and
Demetrius join them in the hunt. They take off hunting.

Act 2. Scene 3.

This scene opens with Aaron burying gold in the forest. After he does so,
Tamora enters and speaks words as one lover to another to Aaron, speaking about
birds and melodies and shit. Aaron replies, saying instead that he intends to
kill Bassianus and enable Chiron and Demetrius to rape Lavinia. He then gives
Tamora a letter to give to the emperor.

Bassianus and Lavinia enter, and Aaron runs off to fetch the Chiron and
Demetrious. Bassianus begins to question Tamora on her doings, guessing at her
involvment with Aaron, and Lavinia accompanies Bassianus in his questioning.

Demetrius and Chiron enter, and after Demetrius asks his mother what is wrong,
Tamora replies that she is being assulted by Bassianus and wishes revenge.
Hastily, Demetrius and Chiron stab Bassianus.

Words are exchanged between Lavinia and Tamora before Bassianus is buried by
the brothers, who take Lavinia and exit. Tamora exits.

Meanwhile, Aaron and the sons of Titus Quintus and Martius, are walking when
Martius falls in the pit where Bassianus was buried. Aaron runs off, and
Quintus, in trying to help his brother falls in as well. Aaron comes back with
the emperor, Saturnius, who learns that his brother has been killed.

Tamora now enters with Titus and Lucius, who gives a letter to Saturnius
framing the two brothers for killing Bassianus. Titus, not believing his sons
guilty, asks to give bail, and Saturninus denies that, saying that the sons are
clearly guilty. Titus takes Lucius and leaves.

Act 2. Scene 4.

The scene opens with Demetrius and Chiron, the two sons of Tamora, mocking
Lavinia after having not only raped her but also cut her tongue and hands so
she can not speak or write of what happened. They exit, leaving her there
helpless.

Marcus enters, and seeing his neice in such a state, monologues, first
realizing the full extent of the damage, then comparing her to the story of
Philomel, and finally resolves to help her and bring her to her father.

