20180416 And thus we are all ensnared
==
So since ffxv was on sale, I decided to go ahead and pull the trigger and
really rip into this game. Going into it, here is what I know

 1. The party consists of a japanese boy band of characters, one of whom is the
 prince of a king who is way to imperial for the modernish setting and theme of
 the game.
 2. The prince is due to marry a princess of another kingdom, but something is
 going to go wrong there.
 3. There is going to be a lot of driving and a lot of grinding and walking
 around and random rpg-ish bullshit.
 4. Cooking
 5. Kingdom Hearts-y battle system kinda idk I don't get it yet

So yeah, I am going into this game with the lowest of expectiations, so that at
the worst case scenario is all my low expectations are met and I can be one of
those guys that comes up with a very informed and well written essay on why the
game sucks. Hopefully I find some merit in it, but we will see.

I have played through the first part of the game, and so far in something like
an hour and a half I have talked to the king, pushed a broken car, put gas in
the car, eaten some food at the eatery, killed some wolves and Ixion things,
and followed a couple quest markers.

I'm not even going to touch on the very obvious and entirely shameless fan
service that is Cindy.

I don't get the battle system yet. I understand that attack attacks and that
dodge dodges, and you can parry after a dodge, and the whole warping thing
shows promise although I don't quite get it yet. So far the battles have been
"hold R2 to win" and use techniques if you want to win faster. We'll see how it
pans out.

2 things to note

 1. Driving wasn't awful, except at night where I was forced to hold R2 for no
 real reason. Besides that, it gave me time to go to the bathroom, fuck "taking
 in the polygons"
 2. I deplore the options. Like, if I get in the car, don't warn me against it
 and give me options, just let me get in the fucking car. And shit like
 choosing which of 3 options to put into a journal to send to my bride to be is
 silly. It's easy enough to ignore, but I still hate it. Illusion of immersion
 at its finest.

A couple more things to note.

First, I'm upset at the game over. FFXIII did it right where, if you die in an
encounter you are able to restart at that encounter as if it didn't happen.
Here, though, especially the way that everything is based on quasi immersion, 

Okay, so I'm a little upset about the way combat works. Firstly, there isn't
really much way to know when you should be blocking. Secondly, there doesn't
seem to be much depth to it, like, you come up with an ideal strategy for a
fight, execute that strategy, and then you win, else you lose. I know it's like
that for past ff's as well, but still.
