CONCLUDING NOTE.


We have now passed through the Iliad, and seen the anger of Achilles, and
the terrible effects of it, at an end, as that only was the subject of the
poem, and the nature of epic poetry would not permit our author to proceed
to the event of the war, it perhaps may be acceptable to the common reader
to give a short account of what happened to Troy and the chief actors in
this poem after the conclusion of it.

I need not mention that Troy was taken soon after the death of Hector by
the stratagem of the wooden horse, the particulars of which are described
by Virgil in the second book of the Ćneid.

Achilles fell before Troy, by the hand of Paris, by the shot of an arrow
in his heel, as Hector had prophesied at his death, lib. xxii.

The unfortunate Priam was killed by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.

Ajax, after the death of Achilles, had a contest with Ulysses for the
armour of Vulcan, but being defeated in his aim, he slew himself through
indignation.

Helen, after the death of Paris, married Deiphobus his brother, and at the
taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to reconcile herself to Menelaus her
first husband, who received her again into favour.

Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murdered by Ćgysthus, at the
instigation of Clytemnestra his wife, who in his absence had dishonoured
his bed with Ćgysthus.

Diomed, after the fall of Troy, was expelled his own country, and scarce
escaped with his life from his adulterous wife Ćgiale; but at last was
received by Daunus in Apulia, and shared his kingdom; it is uncertain how
he died.

Nestor lived in peace with his children, in Pylos, his native country.

Ulysses also, after innumerable troubles by sea and land, at last returned
in safety to Ithaca, which is the subject of Homer's Odyssey.

For what remains, I beg to be excused from the ceremonies of taking leave
at the end of my work, and from embarrassing myself, or others, with any
defences or apologies about it. But instead of endeavouring to raise a
vain monument to myself, of the merits or difficulties of it (which must
be left to the world, to truth, and to posterity), let me leave behind me
a memorial of my friendship with one of the most valuable of men, as well
as finest writers, of my age and country, one who has tried, and knows by
his own experience, how hard an undertaking it is to do justice to Homer,
and one whom (I am sure) sincerely rejoices with me at the period of my
labours. To him, therefore, having brought this long work to a conclusion,
I desire to dedicate it, and to have the honour and satisfaction of
placing together, in this manner, the names of Mr. CONGREVE, and of

March 25, 1720

                                                                   A. POPE

Ton theon de eupoiia--to mae epi pleon me procophai en poiaetikn kai allois
epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautan euodos
proionta.

                           M. AUREL ANTON _de Seipso,_ lib. i. Section 17.





END OF THE ILLIAD

