This document is for learning a word or so at a time, writing it a bunch, and
using it in russian sentences and such. When I learn more about conjugation and
such, I will include those cases as well, and as I get more familiar with
Russian, English will be used less and less.

I am going to start list some pronouns, because I know they will be used a lot

The first person pronoun "I" is represented in russian by

Я    ("I" am working)
Меня (That was "me")
Меня 
Мне  (
Мной
Мне

Upon further analysis, I have decided to use more concrete words, because I am
unsure about the specifics of such a fundamental pronoun.

Lets start learning vocabulary with family.

Отец (Father)
Отецы (Plural)
Отеца 
Отец
Отец
Отец


All right, so we're doing this again with a different approach.

Given a word, I want to be able to tell its gender, and the stem/conjugation of
it.

Lets start by going over the different cases.

Before I want to start talking about cases, I just want to list "The Seven
Letters" for the seven letter rule. The seven letter rule has to do with
letters that follow one of these seven letters.

Гг Кк Хх Жж Чч Шш Щщ

In the nomnitive case (the dictionary definition, or "stem" of the noun), if
the last letter of the word is a consonent or Й, the noun is masculine, the
feminine nouns will end with а or я, and neutral words will end with о or е.
If a stem ends with the soft sound ь, it can be either male or female, I'm not
sure how to tell. Also I'm not sure, but maybe words never end in э or ы or
etc., or something else.

It seems that plural words will end with ы or и for male/female cases, and with
а or я in neutral cases. Most masculine (plural) words will end with ы, which
is appended after the final consonant, and most feminine words with и, which
will replace the final vowel (or ь if so the case). So a masculine word ending
in й (or ь) has that letter replaced by и. ы is used for feminine words when
the word ends in а (unless it follows one of the seven letters, then use и
anyway). Neutral plurals will end with а or я, cooresponding to о or е endings
respectively (and always а if preceded by the seven letters).

As an aside, basically what this all boils down to is that plurals will
generally end with some sort of "ee" sound. Neutral word plurals will end with
an "ah" sound. In it's coarsest form, the male version of the ee sound is ы and
the female version is и, while the neutral sounds for "ah" are а and я. It is
also worth noting that а and я are the endings of the stems for feminine words.

Also, there is not a way to take an arbitrary string of Russian characters and
determine if the word is plural or not, although we can boil it quite a bit.
This is what we can deduce based on what we have so far. Any string that ends
in a consonent or Й is singular male. Any word that ends in ы or и is plural.
There is no way to determine outside of knowledge of vocabulary whether the
plural word is male or female. Any word that ends in а or я is either female
singular or neutral plural. Again, it seems there is no way to tell without
vocabulary.

Now lets on to the Accusative case. The Accusative case is not used much in
English (I was it) (It was me) (and you can see in these two examples "I"
transforms to "me" but "it" remains the same) but is used a little more
extensively in Russian. In fact, it is possible for the word to remain
unchanged in the accusative, so again there is no way to take an arbitrary
string and determine if it is accusative. The rules for unchanged accusatives
are convoluted. Inanimate Male words, female words ending in ь, and all neutral
words remain unchanged. For animate male words, either append а after a
consonent, or replace the vowel with я. For female words, replace а and я with
у and ю.

Okay, I don't know about you, but I am getting rather bored of this sort of
tedium and want a table or something.

I don't want to talk about plurals any more, and instead just want to talk
about singulars. Also patterns I've noticed.

Let's start with some pairs I've noticed. а and я go together (ah and yah), о
and е go together, ы and и go together. There are six cases, Nominitive,
Accusative, Dative, Genitive, Instrumental, Prepositional. Each one can be
pluralized, and is either male, female, or neutor (each of which has two
regular forms) giving 72 possibilities. This would best be placed on a table
of 12 rows and 6 columns, one column for each case and one row for each form,
along with a second set of rows for each plural form.

I am going to write out the Russian alphabet in order a few times, and then I
might even dabble with writing out Russian proper names as I see fit.

абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя
абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя
абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя
абвгдеёжэийклмнопрстуфзцчшщъыьэюя
абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя
абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя
абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя
абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя

I feel like writing some names now

Фёдор
Пётр
Алексий
абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя

абвгдеёжзийклмнопрстуфхцчшщъыьэюя

мак

Okay, so let's do this the other way, I'm going to make my own guide to
learning Russian, but it's going to be the shitiest guide because there are
things that could very easily be wrong. So yeah, let's get into it.

So let's start with the alphebet. I know there are ten vowels in Russian, 5
hard and 5 soft, and they sorta kinda correspond to english's five vowels
except they don't. И is the primary Russian conjunctive.

    А и Я
    Э и Е
    Ы и И
    О и Ё
    У и Ю

And the way I am going to make this journal, I will do my best to explain
things indented in Russian as I go. I also very much want to avoid mixing up
Russian and english, so I will try and learn the Russian as I go. So instead of
saying Hard and Soft vowels, I will use the Russian, (when I come across it),
but I will try never to get fixated on one thing to much.

There is an eleventh vowel, that is always (maybe always) used in conjunction
with other vowels.

    Й

So let's group the Russian letters.

Hard Vowels
    А Э Ы О У
Soft Vowels
    Я Е И Ё Ю
Always Hard Consonents
    Ж Ц Ш
Always Soft Consenents
    Ч Щ
Soft sign (Мягкий знак)
    ь

So in Russian, almost every consonent, except those five above, can be either
hard or soft. The hard version is made by using just the tip of the tongue, and
the soft version is the "Russian sounding" version, with the tounge pressed
agressively. When saying the letters individually, it helps me to think about
it in terms of this. Hard sounds will be more relaxed, where as the soft sound
will be more forceful, like someone was asking you how to pronounce a letter,
and the hard sound would be you casually pronouncing it, where as the soft
sound would be you pronouncing it more annoyed like. This is a really imperfect
way of describing this, because really it just comes to memorization. The
difference is the soft sound will have more sound attached to the end of it, so
if you think about the modulization of the sound, the hard sounds will end
abruptly, and the soft sounds will trail off.

So how do we know by the spelling of a word if a consonent is soft? Well, if
the consonent is followed by can use the soft sign (ь) or one of the soft
vowels (я е и ё ю) then the consonent is soft, otherwise it is hard (the
otherwise I'm not sure of, but the first part I am pretty confident of). When
it comes to spelling rules, we will only use (ь) to indicate a soft consonent
when the consonent is at the end of a word, or is followed by another
consonent, where as if the soft consonent is followed by a vowel, the softness
of the vowel indicates the softness of the consonent. So instead of calling the
vowels hard and soft, really there are only five vowels in Russian, and they
indicate that the hard or softness of the preceding consonent. The soft vowels
will only be used after a consonent (making that consonent soft) or in
standalone syllables at the beginning of a word.


So looking at an arbitrary Russian word, a consonent is hard when.

Hard: Followed by consonent or hard vowel or at the end of a word.
Soft: Followed by (мягкий знак) or soft vowel

Which covers everything that can happen.

Now, there are almost certainly exceptions to this, but I assume they are rare,
and will come with trial and error rather than memorization.

So another feature of the (мягкий знак) is that it can be used to "double down"
on the soft consonents, meaning a soft consonent followed by the (ь) followed
by a soft vowel (е ё и ю я) will indicate the consonent is not only soft, but
also that in represents a sort of pause between the consonent sound and the
vowel sound. So the sound is almost it's own syllable, but not really.

A question I have at this point is whether or not the soft sign will be
followed by a hard vowel. My instinct says no, but I could be proven wrong. I
will keep this question in my head as we go.

--

Here are some words I learned in Russian today.

To refer to myself
    Я
To refer to a group of us
    Мы
To refer to a person I am speaking with
    Ты
To refer to a person or people I am speaking with
    Вы
To refer to some man
    Он
To refer to some woman
    Она
To refer to a group of people
    Они

    я и ты
    Он и она
    Ты и вы
    Они

Some conjunctives

Combinator
    И
Selector
    Или

Next, I want to learn a simple verb, to read.
I learned this word from a youtube video series on Russian Grammer.

    читать
    Я читаю. Ты читаешь. Мы читаем. Ничёсе!

