So I came up with the idea of this book the other day as I was meditating after
performing the Wim Hof breathing exercises. The idea for this story has been
around me since college, and I have even dabbled with excerpts for it at that
time that probably don't exist anymore, or if they do they exist in the depths
of my hard drive somewhere next to my journal article expressing my contempt
towards the schooling system. Regardless, the idea is thus.

I want to write a book centered on the theme of the realm of heaven in the days
before the fall of Satan and the creation of Hell. In the lore of Christianity,
there is an eternal time before the fall of man and before the fall of Satan
where the heavenly beings existed in their eternal realm in harmony with each
other. The reason I find this time interesting is because there is very little
in literature or scripture written about it. It's alluded to in the bible as
well as in works such as Paradise Lost, but those works are concerned with the
creation of man and of man's role in the context of the heavenly realm.
Paradise Lost speaks of the fall of Satan, but there are very few verses
written dedicated to the time before the fall. However, that time is eternal.
This fact leads well to giving any author creative freedom to create any world
whatsoever as he sees fit, without fear of conflicting with current lore in any
significant way.

An idea I have had would be to retell the story of the fall of satan, but
instead have Satan win the heavenly war, but I have decided to refrain from
this approach for the main reason that it is very contrived, and while it does
allow for creative freedom in the sense that I am doing away with current lore,
it would simply go through in the cosmos of our own human existance as simply a
cute idea that some people might find interesting, but would not have any
lasting impact on how we as humans think or feel.

So that being said, I do feel it is important to understand that I do not want
to take the lore of Christianity as scripture in the writing of my story (no
pun intended, as hard as that is to believe). Rather, I want to be able to talk
of characters and places, and have their story be consistent internally with my
story, but I do not want to be concerned with how my story fits in the story of
Christianity as everyone knows.

This is a tricky subject. One could see my work as a sort of "fan fiction" of
Christianity, similar to the way one could write about the foundation of
Hogwarts in the Harry Potter universe entirely independently of Rowling and
publish it in a similar way. However, since Christanity, and any lore really,
is more of a living and breathing thing, with works that continue to add to the
whole of it across generations of human beings, it becomes gray what adds to
the lore and what is simply fan fiction. To that I say, I wish to create a
story in the Christianity universe, and any contradictions it may have with
existing lore simply contributes to the whole host of contradictions that
already exist in the lore. I would like to think of my work as an expansion and
updating of the current lore of Christanity rather than as an auxillary
fantasy.

With that out of the way, I want to begin to discuss some of the ideas I have
had for this story.

The first idea I have had, and I have had this idea since the inception of this
book in my head, was the idea of "headless angels". These are angels which, in
their society, have had no use for flight in many years, and have forgotten the
art, and in order to "jump start" their re learning of it, will willingly
impale themselves through the skull to remove their fears and inhibitions of
it, and with this gone, their natural instincts will be the only thing to guide
them, thus allowing them to fly again. This action is usually only done for one
of two reasons. One is as an act of desperation in allowing themselves to do
what is necessary for what they believe to be right. This plays on the theme of
sacrifice. The second is those who do it voluntarily, for whatever selfish or
altruistic purpose they believe will allow them to carry out their role in
existance to the best of their ability.

When I first conceived of this idea, it was with the notion that the process is
irreversable. However, thinking on it now, I feel it would be a better
literarry tool if the angels had the ability to do so temporarily, losing only
a part of themselves in the process, but evenutally being able to recover from
the event.

The vision I have for this process in that of an angel, perhaps in a
ritualistic manner, or in a manner of haste, taking a dagger or otherwise
deadly item, and thrusting upward through their throat under their chin and
back along the brain stem of their spinal column, into their brain. While there
are certainly some details to be ironed out, not the least of which is asking
the question of Angelic anatomy, but also such things as whether blade remains
or is removed, and whether the wounds caused heal immediately or persist for
eternity, the concept is there, and I feel that it can be a central theme in
the story telling.

Having now begun to talk of actually creating the book, I have come up with
another central theme of the story, and that is the concept of eternity. I
would like, in whatever way I could, to create this world in a way in which
everything lives for eternity. In this way, living things are neither created
or destroyed, and the only thing that changes is the ebb and flow of the
reality of characters.

Having said that, I do want to keep the concepts of life and death, but instead
of speaking of it as a binary state of being, with a character being either
alive or dead at a given moment as is the case in our reality, I would rather
let the concept be a sort of spectrum, with concepts of charcters that are
full of life versus those that are void of it, and all of those inbetween. This
also goes very well with the concept of the headlessness, with such angels
sacrificing some of their life to reach a state of heigntened physical
capability. Again, this is a concept that requires ironing, as to say life in
this universe is akin to a health bar in a video game would be uninspired, but
the concept is there for me to play with.

Another concept that has to be reasoned about is that of other varities of
beings in this universe. Obviously, angels are the number one concept that I
have conceived at this point, but I'm not sure what to do about other
characters such as God or The Spirit. Not only that, but I would like to
include some of my own creation as well, for there is no reason to restrict
myself to the imaginary beings already existing in the lore, and alas, due to
the nature of the work I am creating, I would very much like to extend the lore
of Christanity to include other beings. These beings, though, won't neccesarily
be pivitol to the whole work of Christianity as we know it today, obviously
they cannot be, but instead I could say that they just simply haven't been
explored yet in the current lore.

The first concept I have is that of an "Immortal". In this context, an immortal
would simply be a sort of statue, much larger than angels or the other beings,
always still and only roused to action when absolutely neccesary. I imagine
these immortals as guardians or gatekeepers, always remaining outside the
realms of the quarells of those around him and instead only fullfilling their
duties as need be. They have no wants and no needs, they require nothing and
give nothing. Instead, they only exist. They are neither malovelent nor
merciful, only carrying out their actions as they decide to do so.

At this point, it goes without saying that these Immortals need to be ironed
out as well, and to be totally honest with myself, I might as well put that
qualification on any character concept placed forth in this document so that I
can refrain from contiuing to bring it up from here forward.

At this point I wish to stop speaking of concepts and themes and talk a bit
about the idea of the narrative structure of the story as I have it in my mind
right now. I have very much been inspired by Tolkein's the Lord of the Rings
and would like to create a work similar to that. Of course, I wish to only draw
inspiration from that work, but at this point the narrative structure I have in
my head is very similar to that of the Lord of the Rings.

That being said, while I want to remove some of the concepts of "right" and
"wrong" and "good" and "bad" from the backbone of my story, it becomes
difficult to write in a universe such as this without placing characters in
different camps, and alas, Christanity is already and unfortunately placed in
camps such as these anyway so it is a bit unavoidable. It also becomes
difficult to write a story in this kind of universe without a central
circumstance and conflict to be resolved, and while I want to avoid the pitfall
of a Song of Ice and Fire and ensure that there is a central conflict to center
the narrative on, at this point I only have some fleeting ideas of individual
events within this conflict without having an idea of what the conflict should
be. A great war seems to be the easiest thing to write about, but I want to
create a story that is somehow above the concepts of war and peace. Again, this
goes back to the concept of life and death, and in this universe I want the
concepts of war and peace to be a lot more fluid than in our reality where we
set dates for the beginning and endings of war times.

A core concept I have a bit in my head is the concept of beginning. That is, I
envision a beginning without structure, and the conflict could be the
arrangement of that structure into a heiarchy of existance for different beings
in this universe. In this way, I could have all of the characters begin as
equals in the universe, and tell of God's rise to power as the supreme being in
the realm of heaven. I like that a lot, actually, thinking on it at this
moment. This creates room for conflict that is very organic with the lore of
Christanity.

I would also like to inject a bit of Daoist thought into this universe, by
rethinking what the holy spirit is in terms of the yin and the yang of the
universe. I do want to be clear that I am not creating an avengers
conglomeration of all the superheroes of different mythologies into one work,
that would be silly and would only serve to titilate the fancy of ones
nerdistic fantasies. However, I believe that it is long over due that the lore
of Christanity be updated to more modern times, especially given that it is
still practiced in todays modern world, and that we combine the concepts from
well written and time tested philosophies into our way of thinking today. In
that way, the spirit will be akin to the Dao in that it flows through all
things, and serves as a catalyst for all that moves through the universe I am
creating.

Wisdom without strength is meek, and leads to the path of resentment; force
without guidance is destructive, and leads to the path of ruin. In your quest
for the Yin, always be aware of the evil that seeks to harm, and in your quest
for Yang, seek the guidance of the wise. Develop the Yang so that you may forge
the Yin. Meditate on the Yin so that you may direct the Yang. In a battle of
strength, the Yang will overcome the wisdom into its own nebulous emptiness; in
a battle of wits, the Yin will redirect the force that opposes into its own
oblivion. Either energy in abscence of the other always leads to defeat. Only
in their union can one find fullfillment.

An interesting concept and eclectic saying I just thought of, "the king of the
servant". Alas, every servent has a king, and a king has servents. One always
thinks of a king owning his servents and using them to his own gain, and in the
case of a servent/king relationship such as slavery this relationship is very
eschewed in favor of the king. However, one must rememeber that many times in
this relationship, the servent needs the king just as much as the king needs
the servent, and in that way one can create a symbiotic relationship between
the two that works to highlight the nature of such a bond. Thus, the saying
"the King of the Servent" serves to highlight the fact that a servant has a
king just as much as a king has a servant.

I also like this very much in the context of my story, in the rise of God. I
like the concept of a god that does not request the praise of those below him,
and instead is even unhappy with those that bow to him, not in a malovelant
way, but in a way that would bring him to tears. God's rise to power should
come about as those around him begin to give him praise, while God never
requests or demands praise from those around him.

Another concept for my story would be the concept of two characters able to
combine, physically, in some way. The physical manifestation of this must be
ironed out, and the method of combination should be metephorical in its
telling. In this way, I would like to think of characters such as Yahweh and
God being different characters, Yahweh being the Yang to God's Yin, Yahwah
demanding and requiring the praise of his inferiors, and God refusing outright
that same praise. Perhaps not God but some other name for "the Lord" could be
used, but the concept is there regardless of which name I end up deciding to
attach to it. This also merges some of the concepts of Judaism with
Christanity, again bringing in a more updated version of the religion and
mythology we have today.

This combining of characters could also be used for Satan, Lucifer, Beelzabub,
and etc., with the method of their combination having a gruesome and graphic
representation while the combinations of God and The Lord having more warm and
soothing unions.

I feel it is important to distinguish as well the difference between the
concepts of Yin and Yang vs. Good and Evil. This is where every TED talk
speaker ever jumps for joy and creates a 2 by 2 diagram with axes of Yin and
Yang and Good and Evil. Evil Yang and Good Yin are pretty obvious, the first
being raw force in the path of destruction, such as a terrorist, and the latter
being raw intellegence in the pursuit of healing and restoration, such as a
doctor, but the other diagonal exists as well. The Good Yang is someone that
means well and uses force and application of energy to acheive that end, such
as a soldier fighting for his people, and the Evil Yin would refer to someone
that uses trickery and deception as means to his own selfish ends, such as a
slimy politician. This concept is not very enlightening when put in such simple
terms, but I use it to illustrate the distinction between the Yin/Yang and
Good/Evil balances.

At this exact moment in time I don't have any examples of how this concept
would apply to my story, but I will say that I wish the concepts of Yin and
Yang to be more pivitol as a whole than the concepts of Good and Evil, for two
reasons. The first is that the concepts of Yin and Yang are more important for
self growth than good and evil, for the most well intentioned person in the
world can't acheive anything without the power to do anything about it, but
secondly because the concepts of good and evil are so overplayed in todays
world that people actually believe them to be absolutes in the nature of the
universe, which is, of course, blatantly absurd (the stars care not for labels
such as good and evil) but is unfortanatly what I have to work with. As such, I
wish to keep Yin and Yang as central themes in this work, using them more often
explicitly as neccesary, while keeping the concepts of Good and Evil as more
implicit, mentioning them explicitly when their distinction as seperate
concepts could be blurred otherwise.

--

I have the idea of a villian, (or just character) that acts by putting masks on
to fulfill different roles. In particular, all of the roles he chooses are
sinister in nature, and involve some level of what most would agree could be
called evil in the most vile or sadistic sense. These masks would be masks that
have been hallowed by the gods to contain the soul of that which wears it, and
certain masks have been worn on the bodies of mummfied kings of great political
or xenophobic tyrantical rules, and by harnessing this left over spirit, he is
able to become the fulfillment of that dead king, and continue on the line.

Other masks were worn by long lines of direct royalty in the days of Monarchy,
for the purpose of lies and deceit in the doings of politics, and from Father
to Son, each learning from the power of the mask and ever enhancing it's power
as the bloodline continues, the mask of the Gaul becomes a mask of deception
and cunning, filled with ruthless yet collected energy.

--

Let all be told, in this book of jests,
How Delita, being thus ensnared
In the workings of a fictional world,
Has gone through trial and tribulation
And returned on the other side
Victorious; yes, indeed it is so,
Victorious is the word, and victorious is the tale.

Let us not dwell upon the workings of
Exactly how those of the real physical world
Were able to impart themselves onto this
Magical world called Eorzea, a digital escape-world
Created by those that choose to profit
On the angst and nihilism of the millions;
No, instead let us talk of the romance,
The story of two souls, two real souls,
Who sought escape from the real and instead
Found something arguably more real than
These very words being read at this very moment,
Just how the ink on a page merely reflects
The real and undeniable sensations one feels
When recounting a sad or woeful tale,
Or rather beautiful and trancendent
If the tale be worthy, but I digress;
These sensations are nothing but real
And in this same way, the two souls,
Known at first to eachother as
Delita Webster the Warrior of Jenova, and
Eden Marie the Healer and Second in Command
of the Guild led by Lucifel Caelum, Versa,
but afterwards known as Brett of Dallas
And Ciara of Houston, two neighboring cities
That are only distant because each one spreads
Too many square miles.

So, let us begin not at the beginning,
Because the beginning is always the most boring place...
In the beginning, there was nothing, and it always will
be like that; the beginning of tales is necisarily the same
way. So instead of the beginning, lets begin in the middle.

Let it be told Delita's first memory of Eden Marie.
Before that, breif backdrop of the context.
Brett was born like any other child, vaginally,
And after some hours of convusion. Some twenty-two
Years after that incident, Brett would be what some
Might call, "An angsty teenager", even though he
Was not a teen and his angst was entirely inward,
And only flowed outward at times of great frustration
or futility. This Brett, he just graduated with honors
with a degree in Computer Science, but he didn't like that,
and instead decided to live in his car. So he
Drove his way to Seatle and smoked all the weed there
and slept in his car, and a good four months later,
He drove his way back to Dallas, lived in his car
For another two months, until his parents convinced him
to move back in with them. From that point on, Delita
Fell into the pit he knew he would if he moved back
in with his parents, and he took to video games,
Electing to sleep when the sun was up
And to play games when the sun was down,
Sleeping always eleven hours per cycle of the sun and moon,
If not more for the nap that must be taken.

This picture being painted thus, of a man consumed
With bitterness and resentment towards the world,
And no more so due to such an experience, but still
Always having angst for something greater, something more.
And so he took to games, until he landed on Final Fantasy XIV,
The game where we are now. The land of Eorzea,
where over a million people would log in daily,
complete daily quests, interact with guild members
in a very real and social way, and log out, go to sleep,
and continue on with whatever life they may or may not have.
In this world, Delita found comfort,
For it was well defined; the purpose was given by the developer:
Talk to this NPC, kill monsters at this location,
Return the quest and receive experience,
Receive enough experience, you level up, you advance the quest
And make it one step closer to your goal.
At first the goal is just to get to a certain level,
But when you recieve that level, you quickly form a new
goal to get to the next zone in the quest line,
Or to acquire a piece of gear from a dungeon, or something else entirely,
But the purpose was always there, given by a developer
Benevolent in their production of ever relevent content.

--

The Russian project.

Learning to type in Russian.

Windows 10 -> Control Panel -> Languages 
Лопж пж щажжпфд

Оызе жопл лопж пж жы нашмпдг Шыызу Лопж ажвр лы шфклпюфлв ьв фж ф мпр

--

This story was originally published on Dec. 16, 1993.

A 19-year-old man apparently bent on avenging his firing from a job at a pizza
parlor last summer is suspected of systematically slaying four workers and
wounding another in the worst slaughter in Aurora’s history.

As news of the magnitude of the tragedy spread, police arrested Nathan Jerard
Dunlap at his mother’s home yesterday morning in the killing spree Tuesday
night at Chuck E Cheese’s Pizza at 12293 E. Iliff Ave.

“We have the suspect in custody. He’s off the streets,” said Mike Stiers, chief
of investigations for the Aurora Police Department.

Police believe Dunlap, who has multiple misdemeanor arrests, worked his way
through the restaurant after it closed at 10 p.m., methodically shooting five
victims.

“This shouldn’t have happened. This is a kids’ restaurant, a kids’ place.
Nobody should have done this,” said Julie Pedone, a Chuck E Cheese employee who
often works in the restaurant’s showroom where, dressed as the mouse Chuck E
Cheese, she entertains children.

Stiers said Dunlap’s motive was most likely revenge as he vented his rage at
being let go from the pizzeria months ago.

“It appears he obviously may have held a grudge over the firing and shot the
five employees,” said Stiers, adding “so what takes it this long for that
individual to find the trigger and go ahead and do this, we don’t know.

“Until he tells us why he did it, we’d only be speculating,” he said. But “it’s
beyond our comprehension as to why someone might do this.”

Killed in the attack were Margaret Kohlberg, 50; Colleen O’Connor, 17; Sylvia
Crowell, 19, and Benjamin Grant, 17. The manager who fired Dunlap was not in
the store at the time of the shooting.

All were shot in the head, as was 20-year-old Bobby Stephens, who escaped
through the back door, and made his way to an apartment complex, where he
pounded on doors until someone answered. He told a woman that he and eight
others had been shot inside the pizza place.

The woman called emergency units and they rushed Stephens to the Denver General
Hospital, where he remains in fair condition, while other units swarmed to the
restaurant.

Bruce Cain, Stephens’ stepfather, recounted the incident as told to him.

“He just said he was in the kitchen cleaning up and he heard a bang or
something like that. He wasn’t sure really what the sound was. … It really
didn’t come across to him like a gun,” said Cain. “He looked up, and at that
point someone was walking towards him and he said ‘hello’ to him and the guy
looked at him and just brought his arm up and shot him in the face,” said Cain.

Stephens played dead and escaped through the back door to the nearby Mill Pond
apartment complex at 2171 S. Quentin St.

Stiers said police would not release the tape of the call, which initially came
across as nine people wounded.

Authorities arriving in the normally peaceful suburban area found two victims
in the restaurant’s hallway, one in a room off the hallway, and one in the
manager’s office. Stiers said police do not know the sequence of the shooting,
and no signs of struggle were evident.

Kohlberg and her husband had moved back to Colorado from California Labor Day
weekend.

“Ironically enough, we left California because of what it had become with the
violence, the randomness and the senselessness of what was going on there,”
said Mel Kohlberg. “We wanted to come back home to the simple life. We made it
four years out there and we couldn’t make it four months out here. There’s some
irony in there.”

Police said Dunlap had been in the restaurant earlier Tuesday evening, and
other sources said he had dinner there, but police would not confirm or
elaborate. Restaurant employee Shannon McCurley, 16, said Dunlap frequently
came by the restaurant to say hello, but was bitter over the firing.

Stiers said investigators had “no idea how he entered or exited the building”
but said the front door was open when police arrived. It was not known whether
Dunlap was already in the restaurant when employees closed or whether he had
been let in afterward.

Dunlap’s name came up as investigators interviewed current and former Chuck E
Cheese employees. He had worked in the kitchen at the restaurant for an unknown
period but had been fired sometime last summer. An acquaintance of Dunlap’s
said the suspect was fired because “he didn’t want to stay late and finish
working his shift one evening.” No prior threats toemployees had been made by
Dunlap, said Stiers.

Dunlap’s younger brother, Garland, also works at the restaurant on weekends,
said workers.

Investigators contacted Dunlap’s mother yesterday morning at her home only a
few blocks away from the scene. Dunlap later called his mother, who handed the
phone over to police. Stiers said Dunlap agreed to be interviewed and was
picked up by police at Celebrity Sports Center on Colorado Boulevard in
Glendale.

Police then interviewed Dunlap, along with up to 30 others, but released him
for lack of evidence and sufficient probable cause, said Stiers.

In the intervening hours, however, investigators apparently linked Dunlap to
the scene at the London Square shopping center, site of the restaurant.

When Dunlap arrived home at 2126 S. Oswego St., police were waiting for him
outside his mother’s apartment, and Dunlap was arrested at 10:50 a.m.

After his arrest, Dunlap directed police to a small-caliber semi-automatic gun,
but police have not able to confirm it was related to the crime.

Stiers said Dunlap has not confessed to the killings. No other suspects are
believed to be involved in the shooting spree, said Stiers.

Stiers said Dunlap had been arrested five times in the past year, once for
disorderly conduct, once for trespassing, and three times for failure to appear
on other charges. All were misdemeanors.

Police also said the killings were not related to shooting of a resident nearby
90 minutes earlier. In that case, two youths selling candy shot a man in his
doorway. The man is in fair condition.

Earlier yesterday, before Dunlap’s arrest, dozens of Sylvia Crowell’s friends
and relatives wept as they waited anxiously at Aurora Regional Medical Center,
hoping her condition would improve. However, not long after 9 a.m., she was
taken off of life support.

“When I went into see her, (her family) said that her spirit had already lifted
out of her body, and there was nothing they could do,” said Jennifer Wood, a
high school and college friend of Crowell’s. Both were attending Metro State
College, where Crowell was studying psychology.

Wood, a former cashier at the restaurant, had gotten Crowell a job there only a
few months ago. “They hired her that day,” she recalled.

She said Sylvia needed the job to pay off her car, a gold-colored Ford Tempo
that was still parked in the restaurant’s desolate lot some 12 hours after the
attack.

“She was just a very good person, very forgiving. She followed her church
faithfully,” said Wood. “She was never afraid of dying. She knew where she was
going if she died and what was going to happen to her after she died. If God
wanted her, she would not have wanted to stay on life support,” Wood said.

Sylvia’s friends said they will remember the pretty blond’s smile and kindness.
They said the fun-loving Crowell loved to dance at hip-hop clubs and attend
laser shows, but her serious side was evident as well. Crowell was a member of
Students Against Drunk Driving and a devout Mormon.

“We need more Sylvias, not more killers,” cried Catalina Munoz, who had driven
down from Fort Collins yesterday to visit her friend, only to discover she had
died an hour earlier.

Sobbing, she cried, “That stupid job!” adding, “I hate him! I’ve never hated
anyone in my life!” of her friend’s killer.

Kohlberg, 50, mourned the loss of his wife of 17 years.

“My wife is full of a great deal of love and caring for all people,” he said.
“In the very few short weeks that she was employed at the restaurant, I know
that she developed some very strong relationships with the people there. They
respected her and admired her for what she could contribute.”

When asked about his feelings toward the suspect, Kohlberg said, “I haven’t
gotten to that point yet. I think I’m still in the stage that’s called denial …
or pretty damn close to denial. The anger will come. What I do know is that I’m
no Reginald Denny. I can’t look at that kid and give him a hug.”

Chuck E Cheese’s employee Pedone, 18, who went to school with Ben Grant, said
he was a nice guy who joked and kidded with employees once he got to know them.

“We really thought that Benjamin and Bobby would make it,” she said.

Outside the restaurant yesterday, other Chuck E Cheese employees gathered to
talk about the tragedy. Some vowed to quit their jobs; others wondered aloud at
how such a tragedy could occur at a children’s fun center.

Another group of about 25 teens gathered outside wept and carried flowers for
the victims.

Later in the afternoon, classmates of the victims gathered in smaller groups
and talked quietly.

Some passersby were outraged.

“Have they caught that bastard who did that?” asked Nathan Howell, who drove by
the restaurant yesterday afternoon. “I take my 3 1/2-year-old here all the
time, but not anymore. The odds of something like that happening again is nil
and none, but your conscience will remind you.”

Also yesterday, the restaurant chain hired guards for the Denver-area Chuck E
Cheese’s pizzerias to soothe the fears of employees and customers, said Dick
Frank, chairman and CEO of ShowBiz Pizza Time Inc., parent company of Chuck E
Cheese’srestaurants.

The guards started last night and will stand watch at the pizzerias for “an
indefinite period of time,” he said. “It’s our response after this event in the
Denver market. It’s something we want to do for our employees, managers and
customers.”

Company officials are offering assistance to the families and victims related
to the shooting at the restaurant.

“We’re saddened beyond words for the victims and their families,” said Frank.

“Our first concern will be providing whatever assistance and support they
require as a result of this tragedy,” Frank added.

Nearby business owners were sickened by the shooting.

Daniel Chaplain, owner of Daniel’s of Paris pastry shop, sighed with sadness.

“I don’t see the end of it,” said the father of two girls. “You go out for
dinner, and you don’t know what you’re going to lose – your life, your limb or
your child,” he said.

--

This story was originally published on May 18, 1996.

ARAPAHOE COUNTY — Nathan Dunlap’s mask of icy composure cracked wide open
yesterday when the convicted killer launched into a tirade of rage and despair
that disrupted the courtroom but did not deter the judge from sentencing him to
death for the Chuck E Cheese’s murders.

Dunlap, who had maintained stony silence throughout the lengthy murder trial,
exploded yesterday when the brother of the slain 19-year-old Sylvia Crowell
accused him of killing the Aurora pizzeria employees out of racial hatred.

The comment hit a sensitive note for Dunlap, who has been sentenced to death by
lethal injection for gunning down Crowell, Ben Grant, 17, Colleen O’Connor, 17,
and restaurant manager Margaret Kohlbert, 50, during the Dec. 14, 1993,
shooting spree.

“This is not a black and white issue. Hey, man, check it out. I don’t have a
problem with white people. I got white friends, a white girlfriend, white
attorneys. Why do you do that?” Dunlap fumed. “I don’t give a f- about you,
your mother, or your whole m- f- family.”

“Kill me right now. I have enough of this m- f- s-t. You can take me to the m-
f- little chair and do what the f- you want.” Family members who watched the
outburst nearly got into the fray when Dunlap accused the victim’s relatives of
attacking him and his family.

Some shouted, “You attacked our families already.” Dennis O’Connor, whose
daughter died of a point-blank shot by Dunlap, clenched his fists.

The outburst continued for nearly 3 1/2 minutes as the judge tried to get
Dunlap to sit down. The rest of the courtroom sat in stunned silence before
Dunlap was hustled from the courtroom.

“I felt sorry for all the people who were there,” said Joe Petrucelli, the
Aurora homicide detective who led the Chuck E Cheese’s investigation. “They did
the best they could to keep the dignity of the judicial system. But it went to
hell. Nathan’s anger finally came out.”

After a 10-minute recess, Dunlap was returned to the courtroom shackled at the
legs and wrists. The courtroom filled up early with family members of the
victims and other people involved in the murder trial in Colorado Springs
looking for closure in the case. That included five El Paso County sheriff’s
deputies, the courthouse staff and members of the jury.

Nearly everyone in the courtroom – family members, attorneys, even some members
of the news media – shed tears during the proceedings. Jurors Steve Cohen and
Rick Craddock, among those who voted to recommend the death penalty to Dunlap,
said they wanted to see the case “to the end.”

The atmosphere crackled with high emotion and warmth from people who have
survived a terrible tragedy and will soon go their separate ways.

Many discussed Dunlap’s recent television appearances, in which he confessed
openly to the slayings but showed no sign of remorse.

“(The televised confession) made me so happy. It just showed how right on we
were in our decision,” Cohen said. As the hearing began, prosecutor Jim Peters
spoke in favor of imposing the death penalty for each of the four killings,
then turned the hearing over to the victims’ families.

“Nathan Dunlap will go out of the penitentiary only in a pine box. We have
already had four pine boxes. That is fair, that is right, and that is justice,”
Peters said.

Dunlap listened quietly throughout lengthy testimony of the victims’ families
as they aired the pain, loss and waste caused by the murders.

Dennis O’Connor, a resident of Montrose, said he has “lived in hell” since his
daughter’s murder.

“I have a hell of a rage in me, your honor, and it’s not going to go away. But
your honor could help by sentencing Nathan Dunlap to death and as soon as
humanly possible. If I could be allowed to attend, I would appreciate it,”
O’Connor said. O’Connor said he wanted to hear no more from Dunlap and asked to
be excused from the courtroom should the convicted killer speak.

The daughters of Kohlbert, Melissa McDermott and Rebecca Oakes, spoke
eloquently of their love for their mother and the devastating effect of her
tragic death. McDermott spoke of pervasive suicidal feelings that followed the
loss.

“I want to be reunited with my mom,” she said. “I am under a doctor’s care and
take medication. I find no peace. I didn’t think it was possible to hate so
much. It is a raw, ugly feeling. … Hardly a day goes by that I don’t wish I
could see her,” said McDermott, adding that her family has been torn apart by
the tragedy.

“In effect,” she said, “Nathan Dunlap killed us all. We just didn’t die.”

Oakes spoke of the inspiration her mother brought to her life and said her
anger had turned to a vast sadness. Then she said goodbye to Nathan Dunlap.

“I had a mom who would not want you to kill me too.” Oakes said.

Dunlap exhibited no feelings of remorse during the hearing. When asked if he
wanted to speak, Dunlap rose, signaling O’Connor and Jeremy Grant, Ben Grant’s
brother, to walk from the courtroom.

“Go ahead and sentence me.” Dunlap said. “Let’s go. I don’t understand what you
guys want. You got my life, so let’s go.”

In sentencing Dunlap to death, Leopold brushed aside suggestions that the
convicted killer should be required to keep photos of his victims in his
death-row cell.

“I think it would make no difference.” Leopold said. “Mr. Dunlap has committed
the most vicious and unspeakable of crimes as this court has ever seen.” After
the long trial, Leopold said, “the families on both sides should be given their
peace (now) and go back to their lives. It is time to move on.”

Dunlap also was sentenced to 108 years in prison for crimes related to the
Chuck E Cheese’s case.

Dunlap showed kindness and concern only for his sister, Adinea Ashlock, who
attended the sentencing with her three small children and her husband, Darius
Ashlock. But she left the courtroom when Dunlap lost control early in the
hearing. Outside the courtroom, Ashlock said her brother erupted because he
felt the racial accusation was unfair.

“And, two, don’t you think it is time he cracked open?” she asked.

But homicide detective Petrucelli had a different reaction.

“You finally saw Nathan Dunlap for what he is,” he said. “He has been able to
disguise it very well, but today the disguise came off.” 
