Juliard had once gotten really high, so stoned, that he decided he would think
about reality as a simulation that he is the only one taking part in, and since
in this simulation he only ever experiences himself, he considers himself the
focal point of the entire simulation and consciously decided to live his life
with the implications of this perception.

In an unrelated incident, a car going in the southerly direction on Fourth
Str., sometimes called "the Fourth" by the locals, as it intersects the
perpendicular road named Parker was hit on the right passenger side by an
unaware driver, she being the kind that would apply a full set of makeup during
her commute to work because she thought it saved her time and energy, coasting
westerly along Parker as she failed to notice the red light and flew into the
intersection of Parker and the Fourth in undeniably unfortunate timing as
coincidentally the man in the southbound car was driving entirely innocently through the
green light displayed to him. The speed at which this event occured was,
fortunately for all parties involved, not high enough to cause death or even
serious injury beyond a couple of scrapes and emotional weight, but it was fast
enough that the cars did turn straight sheets of alluminum into mangled folds
of sharp metal that would cost a fair ammount of money to make straight again.
Also in the result of this incident, some glass was shattered, leaving broken
glass shards throughout the intersection, and the form of two car bodies newly
joined as one sat seemingly fused together in the corner as they slid across
and stopped after the impact, sitting undrivable and unmoveable. 

As one can imagine, this scene renedered the intersection, at least for the
immediate time, unusable. Those going Easterly or Northerly were able to avoid
the scene for the most part, most straining their necks to see what happened
and in consequence slowing down traffic but in all other ways, unaffected, but those
going Westerly or Southerly were reduced at first to a complete lockdown,
before people quickly began to at least exit their vehicles and assess the
situation. The accident entirely blocked those travelling south on Fourth Str.
to the point of standstill, and until the wreckage would get cleared this was
no navigating around this scene from this direction. The cars there were
totally and undeniable in a state some might call "stuck" and others might call
"well fuck me I guess we're sitting here now".

After assessment the police were phoned, and within twenty some
minutes the entire scene was overseen by a man in a blue uniform with a fat
belly and a small spiral notepad as his underlings, also in blue uniforms, set
up cones and directed traffick around the incident as a tow truck was called
and enroute to the scene.

As this was going on, Juliard, in the privacy of his apartment, had it in his
mind that he wanted to visit a hookah lounge. In the past, he had experimented
with Hookah and decided that he liked it even if it was a bit of a novelty, and
he hadn't tried hookah in a long time and he was getting a sort of undeniable
craving for it in his lungs which, him now having decided that the world of his
experience was indeed the world as it was in its entirety, led him to decide to
visit a hookah lounge and try some hookah.

Indeed, it was a strange time to visit a lounge as a single man by himself, it
being a weekend, early morning, with the entire day ahead. He knew hookah was
usually a night thing, but he also knew that concepts like "usual" were for those
not existing as the focal point of the entire universe? No, usual was not
for those at the focal point of the universe, Juliard reasoned, and he elected
to find a hookah lounge that morning.

However, in looking for a lounge, he was not able to find one that opened
any time earlier than two hours past noon, and it being three hours before
noon, he could not bring himself to wait that five hours, as who knows what
might happen in that time. He might lose his urge to try hookah again, and
Juliard was afraid that in five hours he could find himself arriving at this
hookah lounge not wanting to try hookah and instead looking like a fool who
drove to a hookah lounge while the sun was still well in the sky and shamefully
drove away as he would decide at the last minute that he really didn't want
hookah. No, that could not do. Instead, Juliard elected to buy himself some
hookah from a head shop rather than from a lounge. It would probably be cheaper
that way, and he would administer the dosage himself.

Having decided his course of action, Juliard sat in his car, started his
engine, and made his way towards the shop. According to his navigator, the shop
was approximately a seven mile drive from his current location, and would take
him across the six-ten loop for most of the way before he would exit to the
Fourth and make his way south on that street before arriving at his
destination.

And so determined on his new quest, one can only imagine Julaird's surprise
when, exiting at his designated location, he found himself sitting in a long
line of cars, all unsure of the reason or cause of delay as they looked down
for at least a kilometer and saw nothing but the glaring of other vehicles down in
the cross section of visible sun. At first considering this a minor delay,
Juliard eventually came to realize that he, along with the other vehicles
unfortate enough to be there at that same time and place, were trapped in
this place for the remainder of however long this traffick may persist, and
were helpless to change their fate.

And in this moment, Juliard had a moment of reflection. If he was the center of
the Universe, as he so hypothesised, then why was he required to wait here with
everyone else, those "others" who were, in this theory, not the focal point of
the universe? Juliard reflected on this a moment and came upon a quite queer
conclusion. Perhaps this was placed here by the universe to test his patience,
or his perspective, or perhaps even his faith, and he would see to it that he,
being the Charactis Primo of the story of the universe, would overcome this
obstacle in the most elegant and graceful way that he could.

As Juliard reflected on this, the traffick came to a complete and total halt.
The only thing one could see along the entire southbound stretch of the Fourth
as it led up to Parker was red brake lights. If one was close enough to see the
intersection, you would see that the entire thing was blocked off for a good
kilometer at least, and those fortunate enough to be that far back could hope
to mitigate traffic by exitting himself from the Fourth and continue their
course down a different road. Juliard was not one so lucky to have this luxury,
for by the time he realized that the traffick was so bad that there was no way
going through, he was already too far through that going out the other way was
not an option either, at least not going by the surface street.

And so Juliard sat in his car, and having held the brake down for a solid six
minutes, decided to place his car in park and toggle down the ignition.

"If I am the dual of the universe, the primary object that complements the
outer with the inner, then what can I do? Can I move the traffick like Moses
supposedly moved the waves of the Red Sea? Am I able to drive over these cars
like Jesus paced over water? Can I call upon the powers of my will to change
the outer if it is so intimately linked with the inner?"

These are the thoughts that went through the mind of Juliard as he sat there.
And as he sat there, he decided to take action, although not in the way most
would consider actual action. He stepped out of his parked and un-running
vehicle, walked around to the back where he stepped on the bumper of the trunk.
The bumper swayed a bit as the suspension of the vehicle bowed at his newly
applied weight, but only enough to give Juliard a sensation brief hesitation
before he continued on. He climbed up over the top of the trunk and onto the
roof of his car. Having meditated many times in the past, this seemed as good
a time as any to Juliard, and he continued to situate himself on the roof of
his unmoving car.

Juliard found himself unable to sit in his favorite meditation position, called
hero pose, without unreasable discomfort due to the heat of the aluminum on the
tops of his shins, so instead he decided to sit in the more dramitic and
picturesque lotus position, deeming it appropriate as a signal to everyone in the
vicinity not to disturb him as he was clearly doing something deep and
meaningful.

As he wobbled his way on to the roof of his car, he eased himself into an
appropiate sitting position, feet and legs crossed over one another and formed
into a tight knot on his hips, creating a tripod of two knees and hips to base
yourself on, and placed his hands fingers up resting on his knees to make the
scene even more picturesque. A photographer would have been proud had there
been one there. From there, he gathered his inner breathe, and inhaled deeply,
before exhaling gently yet firmly. He repeated this many times, not counting
but instead feeling as he began to lose sense of the outer world and began to
lose himself in the inner world of his own thought. He felt his limbs become
tingly as he continued to hyperventilate himself in this controlled and
mannered way, becoming lightheaded and even a little dizzy as his focus was
forced to drift away from his surrounding and instead on managing his breathe.

He continued in this way until his limbs and even his entire torso and body
became like nothing in his mind. His nerves were still sending and recieveing
the signals to and from his body, but his mind decided that those signals were
less important than the signals required to keep the brain active. When this
point was acheived, Juliard let out a last exhale, and let himself rest there.
At first he found he still had pressure inside his lungs, but by letting out
the pressure he acheived an equilbrium with the atmosphere and by using no
energy he was able to retain his lack of breathe nearly indefinitely.

In this state, he could retain his lack of breathe for as long as he desired,
letting all of his body relax into nothing, letting the univese sink away into
nothing, letting all of the thoughts and synapses which used to fly around the
cortex of his brain fly into nothing as his perception of reality was
inevitably altered by his over saturation and followed denial of oxygen to the
brain. By controlling the breathe in this way, Juliard had found trancendence,
and in this place he could mold and shape the universe as he saw fit.

And in that moment, Juliard had a vision. As his body became numb, and his gasp
reflex was being gently repressed by his ego, and he sat there in his
picturesque lotus position atop the car that was still in the middle of the
road that the locals called "the Fourth", he had a vision of pain. He had a
vision of suffering, coming from his soul. He did not know where this came
from. It was not a vision in his eyes, nor was it a sensation of sound, it was
instead what one feels when one hears bad news for the first time and
emotionally reacts to it. It is not the words which caused that reaction, but
what those words mean that does, and it was that feeling that Juliard felt in
his vision. He felt his soul yearning for something, yearning to escape the
inside and become a part of the outside, but unable to due to the breathe
retention of the owner of the two universes.

And as all mortals do when holding the breathe, he eventually let go, and received a rush
of new, fresh, untainted oxygen from the air around him. He took his breathe in
and held it at the top, filling his lungs to the top as high is it would go,
creating maximal pressure between his lungs and the atmosphere and holding the
air so it can stir around in the bronchites and tentacles of his full expanded
lungs. While this air was being held here, he would perform another maneuver,
starting at his feet contracting every muscle and muscle group leading from the
very tips of the toes to the calves, knees, thighs, glutes, core, lats, palms,
and finally chest, all the way up to the neck and head until all the muscles contracted push this new
hyperoxygenated blood into his the space occuping what everyone calls the
skull and throughout his recently oxygen
deprived mind. At this shift in oxygen levels, Juliard would teeter on the edge
of consciousness, feeling the intensity of this new found strength, and by
riding that edge in his mind he was able to create great strength in his arms.
From this position, he placed his arms by his sides, breathe still held in, and
with them held straight the entire time, he would press himself through his
shoulders and down into the palms as his hips would rise above his hands and
below his feet which would uncross from lotus and come up to a complete and
perfectly balanced handstand.

And so was the scene, of a man who meditated on his car and found the strength
to acheive a handstand. And by another coincidence of miracle, at the peak of
his strength and height of his meditative prowess, the police officers that were called had acquired tow trucks,
those tow trucks had come into place, latched themselves on to the bumpers of
those two cars, pulled them up to the lifting dock, and began to carry the cars
away, as the police were able to again route traffick through the intersection
after sweeping away the bulk of the glass.

With pointed toes and extended arms, Juliard held the greatest handstand of his
life to that point, focusing entirely on himself and his world and entirely
ignoring the world around him. And as he stood there, on his hands, he heard a
honk. This honk sound did not startle him, but instead was like a distant
memory long forgotten that only now came rushing back to him in a very gentle
and non-violent way, and in this way he began to recall himself. He was a man
named Juliard, he had decided that he was the focal point of the universe and
that his experience was reflected in the outer just as much as the experience
of the outer was fed into his inner, and he had decided that he wanted to have some
hookah. So he gracefully dismounted from his handstand, walked himself back
into his car, fired up the engine, and continued on his way to the shop.

And as he drove there, he thought that maybe it was him who caused the traffick
to move again. He could not see the scene itself, and did not know what the
accident was or how it might be resolved, but he determined that, due to firing
and concentration of his inner strength, he was able to give the outer universe
the power to reallign itself and continue the flowing of traffick once again.
And who was anyone to tell him otherwise. He felt he experienced the weight of
the universe in that moment, and he felt that he overcame it and realligned it
and brought about the clearing of the obstruction which stopped him and those
around him in the first place. By pushing that weight, perceived as the weight
of the universe, he convinced himself yet again that his experience was unique
in that his was the focal point of the universe, and continued on his way
towards the balance of self improvement and pleasure.

And that is the story of the journey of a man towards either trancendence or a
hookah lounge, no one is sure which.


