There is much difference in having the ability to do something and actually
doing it, for there is great benefit in doing that which you know you have the
ability to do, lest you sit on the knowledge of your ability without action and
let it grow stale.

Both Yin and Yang in the absence of the other lead to emptiness.
Rather, the Yin in absence of Yang is empty;
the Yang in absence of Yin is overfull.

Mind as the Yin, Body as the Yang, two halves of one universe,
The existance of a singular human being. Yin always looking
outward while Yang looked inward. Or Yang of workout and yin of recovery.
Two halves to everything in this way. One can be identified Yin,
the other Yang, but always with eachother, these two are, and without
the other, they fall apart to nothing. Or Exhaust themself into everything.
One or the other. Or something entirely different. It doesn't matter.

The relationship between me as a child and you as an adult started 26 years
ago, and has matured into what it is now. The relationship of me as an adult
and you as an old person started 8 months ago. That relationship is still in
its infancy, but it will mature just as well.

For everything is born out of stillness, and to chaos it will go. Do not fight
the chaos, for that is the destiny of all things living and non, but instead
accept it and allow yourself to become one with the stillness so that the chaos
may not find you in your time.

You ask me, sir, the reason for my way of life. But I ask you the same, but I
only in rhetoric, as I know the answer. For I understand that you and I are of
different kin, and as such have a different nature, and while I can appreciate
your doings in this land, my path is not the one presented for me, because
though I see the fruit of it, I desire more a path of suffering and sorrow, as
those things are indeed two of the many paints that I wish to emblazen my
portrait with. And in this way, I implore to you, allow me to go in my ways,
ill though they may seem to you, so that I can find my transcendence in my own
path.

The man that lies and deceives others, that man is an asshole;
The man that lies and deceives himself, that man is a sinner.

She looked up and saw him, that man, the man she knew in her heart to be evil,
sitting there atop the cliff, in perfect stillness, as the sun glowed red
across his figure. She had known it to be true, she had known that he would
meditate on his deeds with great deliberation and foresight before commiting
his atrocities, but she had not seen it, and for a moment she discarded her
memory of him and saw only a man in stillness, a stillness and calm that very
few would ever seek to find, even herself. Her notion of good and evil
vanished, and she saw that man in introspection, in a stillness and calm that
very few would ever seek to find.  Would it not be wrong to destroy such a man,
this man who had found a depth that is only too rare in others and even indeed
in herself? Is not the unmeditated path of salvation simply the easy way, the
way that is accepted and natural for one such as herself. Can the unmeditated
act of kindness ever be called saintly? She couldn't help but wonder, could it
be wrong to destroy that which has depth, even if that depth was evil? In that
moment, as she examined her thoughts, she could not help but feel that she, in
her hurried and constant need to do what she felt was right, had never stopped
to meditate on her own actions.  Could her intentions perhaps be wrong?  And if
she chose to act on her instinct rather than in meditation as he did, did that
not make her in some strange way more evil than he would ever be?

And tell me, you of self-proclaimed morality, tell me this; if a lion in
nature, in the act killing a deer for hunt, is stopped by yourself (perhaps you
shoot a tranqulizer in its throat in an act of humanity), have you accomplished
justice? Perhaps you have stopped the death of one beast at the hands of
another, and perhaps you might even go so far to say you prevented a murder.
But tell me, what is to happen to the lion? Indeed, the lions are carniverous
by nature, their entire sustenance is taken from the flesh of other meat, with
the grasses of the land being poison to their bodies, and you having prevented
this lion from feasting on his well earned game will surely cause the lion to
eventually die of starvation if this act of supposed justice is continued for a
time. Is the life of a deer more sacred than that of a lion? Would you cause
the starvation of one beast to save another? Is this the justice you speak of?
But this is nature, you say, the nature of one animal to dominate another in a
heiarchy of species. So you admit the nature of beast but not the nature of
man? For surely I say to you, man is nothing more than a beast, a beast
burdened with questions of morality and justice. But perhaps, one could argue,
our justice is also natural, a domination over others in a way similar to a
lion's domination over the deer. And if so, should not the deer do everything
he can to flee the justice of the lion, or even fight against, foolish as that
may be? And at this I tell you brother, I am not the lion of this world, but
the deer, the deer that sees the lion and chooses not to run but instead to
fight against this lion, not concerning myself with what may be right or wrong
but instead simply fighting to live in my own nature, fighting to oppose the
lion which seeks to kill the deer all. Such is the way of things, I choose not
to comply but instead to remain true to myself. Does this make me a fool?
Undoubtedly yes, but I am my own fool, and the fool of no one else.

The gates of hell should not have a quick release trigger.

Haha! Look at you. You want me to be "The Devil" and not just a devil. I tell
you, there are a lot of us. Milton wrote about some of us, but there are a lot
more than even Milton could write about. But all of us exist in somebody to
some extent, the only thing that makes me "a devil" and not "The Devil" is
that "He" exists in everyone, where as I only exist in you. If anything
you should be flattered, that I would come to you alone. You alone are worthy
of this devil, don't take that lightly.
