In that time there was a land known to those that dwelt in it as Eorzea, Land
of the Escape, where all those who could not find their place in their dwelling
would come to discover wonderous beings of fantasy and magic that they would do
battle against both alone and with others in that realm, and in so doing find
in themselves purpose and meaning to their otherwise fruitless lives. One such
individual was known as Delita, named after the hero of Ivalice of which Eorzea
was like a cousin, but having no relation to that hero he found himself at first
as all others in that world naked save the clothing on his back and the role
decided upon him. And of his roles Delita would choose the role of the
Gladiator, sturdy and strong against all foes, always aiming to draw them to
his threats and in so doing absorbing their blows with both grace and
steadiness, so that his companions might destroy them with their mighty attacks
both from afar and by his side, un-impaired by the damage they might bring to
them lest the mighty Gladitor lose the threat upon which he drew from his
enemies.

And so it began, not as the beginning of the life of the one who came there,
but instead of the beginning of a life anew, Delita Webster. This is his tale.

His tale begins as all others in that world, as the slow but steady merging of
his spirit from the world outside to the world within, always growing stronger
and more steadfast in his ways. He would journey solo, helping the townspeople
and villagers of Eorzea as he may, harnessing his skills and refining his
techniques, never concerning himself with purpose for any of it beside the ever
onward pursuit of bettering oneself. And in this journey he would find other
adventurors, like himself, each with their own path in the world of Eorzea. And
at first these meetings were short, each adventurer having their own reason for
completing the task assigned to them, but always working in unison with their
companions, and while the intersection of their paths may be short, each such
encounter served to aid Delita in his quest to become a better version of
himself with each task completed, always learning something from the encounter
and finding ways to refine and master his skills as one that receives the
blows of his enemies.

Ever vigilant in his quest to reach the height of his skill, always thirsting
to defeat more challenging and worthy foes, every adventurer must complete a
sort of coming of age, each unique to the role they choose at the beginning,
and Delita was no exception. And in his time, for his time short in his
determination and steadiness, Delita would learn the ways of the Paladin,
taking oath of both Sheild and Sword and eventually coming to the end of the
first stage of his journey at the Praterium, where all such adventures would
find the complete expression of their skills and utilize for their first into
an encounter of relative ease of that which lay before them, a sort of entry
into their coming to adulthood. And Delita made no short work of this initial
journey, completing more quickly than most, and without shortcut, as he eagerly
awaited that which was to follow.

--

Not long after the completion of the first journey of his new spirit, Delita
would sit and wonder what was to be his next step on his adventure. In doing
so, he would best many new enemies, called Primals in that world, beings of
great difficulty, but he would feel useless as others would take on the primary
roles of defeating them, because while he had the skills, being young to adult
hood he had not acquired the equipment to match them in their might. In that
time of new entry to adulthood, Delita would later learn of the raids that the
adventures of Eorzea would partake in, and in these raids he would learn of the
legendary and long sought after gear that those forturate enough to call
themselves victors of such raids would receive, and Delita, feeling small and
ill equipped in comparison, at that time knew not of the hardships of those
that decided to take on these tasks, and wished himself to step on his path
towards such pursuits.

In this way, Delita stumbled upon his first Free Company, being named the
Phoenix Rising, order of the Phoenix, led by an adventurer by the name of Ari
in the realm of Jenova which was his corner of Eorzea. This Free Company was
humble in its origins, and open in its recruitment, allowing all who desired to
join to be let into its ranks, for at the time Delita knew not of any other,
and though he considered that this group of individuals might not match his
particular goals, Delita desired to become strong in the land in whatever way
seemed correct to him, choosing to take some action as such rather than no
action at all.

His journies in this free company were short, and uneventful, but in it Delita
found many companions, some with slight skill in their respective roles, but
most with quirky, playful and social attitudes, each taking to the land of
Eorzea with their own humble dealings, not desiring the lofty goals of Delita
but being content in their path, whatsoever that path may be. Of these
companions, Delita would not make future contact with in his deeper journies
beyond the his initial coming of age, but of fond memories does he have of one
calling himself Xemnas, with which he began his first steps as a humble raider.

It was in this time that Delita learned of the state of the world of Eorzea. It
so happened that, in the time before Delita, in the long dealings of those
that came before him, the raiders of Eorzea had bested the king of dragons
Bahamut, and having defeated such a foe, the raiders were sitting in
anticipation of new talents and skills that would await them in their future
journey called Heavensward, where the mighty being Alexander would manipulate
both time and space to attempt to bring the raiders to their defeat in the same
way that Bahumut might. Of the lore behind these being Delita concerned himself
not with, but learning of the expansion of their lore and adventures, Delita
elected to take the lead in exploring the new worlds, so that he might become
strong in the world that promised new trials and tribulations that none knew
what might behold them.

And in that time, the gates of the northern lands of Coerthas were opened, and
many adventurers set out on their new journey, each seeing and mastering new
skills and talents not before known to any, and using these new talents, were
able to best the foes, the primals Ravana and Bismarck, and came upon a sort of
second coming of age, a new beginning to their adventures.

Delita, being ever eager to learn and acquire the gear and talents required to
become the strongest version of himself that he could be, set out eagerly to
become one of the leaders in this new adventure, and in so doing became strong
in the ways of the Paladin before any other before him might.

--

And so Delita set out on the new adventure, the second coming of age of the
children of Eorzea, and with no less dedication and steadfastness than his
adventure before; indeed, more so now that he knew he could be at the forefront
of adventurers all taking this journey anew together. So, giving up sleep and
sustanance, it came to be that Delita would complete the new journey at the
Aetherochemical Research Facility before most all others could, and having
acquired the new talents and skills brought to him by his new journies, he
desired to obtain the equipment neccasary to call himself the strongest in the
land.

After acquiring the neccesary tomes by toiling and scouring the region of
Nevereap and the Fractal Continuum, and then by further enhancing his equipment
by taking on hunting tasks and joining his companions in slaying the foul
montsters throughout the new realm, Delita was fully equipped in the greatest
gear at the time save the weapons that he knew not how to acquire. But as he
was obtaining the armors and accesories of strength to complement his set, he
discovered that the bard of Mor Dhona could sing of the Primals that he fought
with his companions in his journey, and in so doing would create more powerful
versions of the beings that guarded the weapons that Delita so desired, the
strongest weapons known to any adventurer thus far.

And so, after obtaining all of the best gear he could save his weapon, Delita
made it his only goal to defeat the new and stronger primals so that he might
be well prepared for any challenge that would be to come after that. And so he
would recruit in the land of Idyllshire a party of 8 adventurers from Jenova to
take on the whale called Bismarck.

After first entering the encounter, Delita would discover that the whale proved
to be much tougher for the uncoordinated and unskilled rag tag party that could
have easily defeated the lesser form, for there were many aspects to the fight
that would punish those who would make mistakes forgiven in the journey before.
For the Bard was crafty in his song, and in his music created a much more
interesting version of the beast than the beast that was fought of old.

However, Delita sought after the challenge, placing harsher requirements of
equipment during his recruitment phases, and having studied the ways of those
that told of their victory over the new primal, he would come to obtain the
knowledge necessary of not only his own role in the encounter but also the role
of others.

In that time, many parties were created, some reaching further stages than
others, and Delita sought the aid of his Free Company, the Order of the
Phoenix, in besting this encounter. Cheif among his companions in this free
company was Xemnas, who in a similar way as Delita thirsted after the defeat of
this new challenge, and of the many failing parties of Delita, Xemnas would
join in. But after forming a party consisting solely of the members of the Free
Company that fail utterly and terribly, and with no dedication or commitment to
completing the task which was set out to accomplish, Delita first came to
understand that this group of people were not like him in motive for joining
the land of Eorzea, and saw the true nature of their being, that of a casual
adventurer whose sole purpose was to enjoy their time in the land, never
concerning themselves with betterment or with accomplishment of tasks set out
to them by their foes, but instead simply completing the tasks which were easy
and in so doing gaining nothing except idle enjoyment of their time.

However, Delita was no such adventurer, instead wanting the honor and glory of
defeating the most challenging of foes before other advenuturers might, and in
so doing he quickly would recognize his casual companions and let them be to
their own devices while he would find others who shared in his hunger for
challenge.

Over many days, dozens of parties were made, some more successful than others,
but none completing the task of defeating the whale Bismarck. And at this
Delita wondered what more he could do in the aid of defeating the whale, and
seeing that his primary role was to draw the attention of the enemy to himself
and mitigate the damage that was done unto him, he found that he was
overstriding in that role, and could cast away some of his vitality instead for
strength, so that he might also contribute to the damage done to the enemy that
others in the party were lacking. And in this way Delita grew confident in his
abilities, and began to grow in strength so that he might contribute his very
most to the completion of the task before him.

In that time, Delita would find many others like him, seeking to defeat the
whale in his domain, and Delita became friends with these so that eventually he
reduce the randomness of finding adventurers who could not fulfill their
duties.

Not the least of these was one calling himself Stray Dog, or simply Stray, who
took upon the role of summoner. This man would join a few of the parties of
Delita, and would complement Delita's character well, because while Delita was
willing to trial with a party that was doomed to fail for a long time, having
hope in his leadership capabilities that the unworthy members might conform to
his leadership and complete the task against all odds, Stray would abandon such
parties at their outset, seeing their lack of ability, and while certainly
there must be some sort of medium to trust and commitment, Stray and Delita
were on complementary ends of the spectrum in this way.

Another that would join the parties of Delita only occasionally, also a
summoner, called himself Gauss Jordan. Gauss would join the parties not because
he required the defeat of Bismarck, as Gauss had already defeated the foe with
his raiding team, but instead would join because he enjoyed helping others in
pursuing their goals, and because he enjoyed the challenge of carrying others
through the encounter. Of Gauss, Delita would learn much from, but this was but
an breif introduction of friends long to be, although it was not known at the
time.

And so it came to be, after much tribulation, that Delita would form a party
containing Xemnas, Stray, and a few others since forgotten, as well as a couple
other random members, that would find the ability to defeat the whale Bismarck.
And though that party made no easy work of the whale, and required many
attemts to finally get an attempt that won, it is said that Delita's spirit
trancended his Eorzean form at the moment the whale fell down into the abyss,
and indeed his most gratifying moment in Eorzea was on that day, for though
Delita would come to best many other much greater foes in his time as an
adventurer, never would it feel so gratifying to best not only his first, but
also his most accomplished using entirely his own skills as a leader of
strangers.

--

In that time, after the defeat of the whale Bismarck, Delita would once again
reflect on his time in Eorzea, and what he wanted to do with it. For very soon,
the Primal Alexander was but beginning to invade the land or Eorzea, and Delita
knew only rumors of the difficulty and reward for defeat of such a foe. In
addition, the foe Ravanna, that the bard of Mor Dhonna sang of contained the
weapons that Delita so desired.

So, with Stray and Xemnas and a couple other friends along the way, Delita
would begin to make the beginnings of what was known in that land as a static,
being a group of people dedicated to the commitment of adventuring together
against the toughest foes of Eorzea, and although he did not know it at the
time, Delita would come to be the creator and leader of a static. But in humble
beginnings all things must be, and Delita simply formed parties consisting of
his friends and some others for the purposes of defeating the spirit of Ravanna
time and time again in hopes of acquiring the precise weapon of choice for each
member of the party.

In this way, Delita acquired the sword and sheild of Ravanna, and in doing so,
before the time of Alexander, he acquired the best gear that Eorzea had to
offer, and feeling ready to face his new foe he would plunge into the Cuff of
Alexander with new found confidence.

Upon entering the cuff, Delita found great joy in learning the new encounter on
his own, and though there were others who had already completed the encouter,
and as such were ever eager to attempt to lead the peoples on how it should be
done, Delita would ignore them, and learn for himself how the encounter should
be completed.

In this way, Delita completed the 4 tiers of Alexander, and though he found
such encounters enjoyable and amusing, he could not fathom how the difficulty
of these fights was meant for only the most skilled, as he was able to complete
within the day with any haphazard adventurers from all across the realms. For
indeed, the primals of Bismarck and Ravanna were of considerably higher
difficulty than this supposed raid.

It was not until two weeks after Alexander's first encounter that the Bard of
Mor Dhonna would sing of the tales of Alexander, and in doing would create, in
much the same way he would sing of Bismarck and Ravanna, a spirit of Alexander
much greater in strength and vitality and mechanical prowess than the Alexander
that was. And in attempting to create a group to complete this encounter, much
in the same way he would to complete Bismarck, Delita would quickly realize
that this was the challenge he long thirsted for.

For in the cuff of this encounter, was the mechanical being Faust, sitting
there before even the first real foe, and upon pulling this mechanical being,
the children of faust would spawn and cleave those at unawares of their doings,
and would hilariously destroy those adventures not prepared for the battle to
come. For Faust was but the gatekeeper to the real encounter, but no group
formed by general adventurers of the realm of Jenova was able to best this foe
in the time required.

It was at this moment that Delita realized that he could not, even with the
strictest recruitment critera, create a group to best even Faust of that time,
for adventurers in that era had grown accustomed to the ease of the encounters
leading to that point. And it was so that Delita came to the realization that
he would need to find a group of 8, a static, to call his own, each with the
same determination and motive and drive that he had himself, so that they may
unite in their pursuits to take on the enemies to come.

--

At this juncture, Delita began to meditate his options, as any man seeking
wisdom in his journies might, and sought to weigh his options.

Recruitment of those of the Order of the Phoenix was an option first considered
in that time, but quickly dismissed as the memory of their magnificent and
humorous failure with the whale called Bismarck was only too revealing of the
inadequecy of those casual adventurers. Secondly, the option already tried
of recruiting any party of wayward Jenovian adventurers was also dismissed;
although in this path Delita saw that perhaps there might be something to gain
not in the defeat of Alexander, but in the chance that he might find
adventurers like himself seeking a static and in so doing he could gather more
friends in that land to join him in his journies. And so this second route, of
joining and creating parties of all who might be join him was determined not to
be of primary importance, but instead was brought as a way to learn and catch
those adventures who might be drawn to his ways, much in the same way a spider
will spend tireless hours to lay a web for flies to come, but will require
other ways to occupy the primary pursuit of his sustanence.

And in this time, Delita decided that his journey was that of a raider, and
that he needed to take the steps of the raiders before him, and surround
himself with those having like mind in raiding pursuits.

It so happened that there was another, a paladin like Delita, of the Oath of
the Phoenix, who sought out a new free company for his own reasons, there being
drama between him and Ari that does not come into the tale of Delita lest this
work be overly cluttered with unneccesary details. And this paladin brought at
awares to the attention of Delita and Xemnas the existance of the free company
known as Organization XIII, led by one calling himself Sora, that housed a most
prominent static in the raiding scene on Jenova, as well as many others who
deemed themselves casual raiders or those who were always interested primarily
in the dealings of raiding in that time.

Of course, knowledge of this free company piqued the interest of Delita and
Xemnas, and they took it upon themselves, after talking together about the
decision, to come to that free company and request invitation to it, so that
they might become fraternized with the raiding scene in Jenova.

In his first dealings of this free company, Delita would come across one
calling herself Icy Latte. To her he asked the questions he desired answers
for, of the statics of Organization XIII and of those seeking static, and she
answered them revealing that indeed there were those in the free company who
wanted to form a static, names of which are unimportant but are remembered such
as Dashiell and Mylla, and also the paladin which first introduced Delita to
this new free company. And in this way Delita joined with Xemnas among the
ranks of this new free company, and began to form parties to associate with
them and determine the health of a static which might form out of them

